video game - wikipedia document.documentelement.classname = document.documentelement.classname.replace( /(^|\s)client-nojs(\s|$)/, "$1client-js$2" ); (window.rlq=window.rlq||[]).push(function(){mw.config.set({"wgcanonicalnamespace":"","wgcanonicalspecialpagename":false,"wgnamespacenumber":0,"wgpagename":"video_game","wgtitle":"video game","wgcurrevisionid":774930275,"wgrevisionid":774930275,"wgarticleid":5363,"wgisarticle":true,"wgisredirect":false,"wgaction":"view","wgusername":null,"wgusergroups":["*"],"wgcategories":["articles inconsistent citation formats","webarchive template wayback links","cs1 maint: unfit url","cs1 german-language sources (de)","pages using isbn magic links","wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages","use dmy dates september 2012","articles lacking reliable references february 2012","all articles lacking reliable references","all articles unsourced statements","articles unsourced statements september 2015","articles unsourced statements september 2009","all articles specifically marked weasel-worded phrases","articles specifically marked weasel-worded phrases august 2009","articles limited geographic scope september 2014","western culture-centric","articles unsourced statements may 2015","articles prone spam october 2013","wikipedia articles gnd identifiers","digital media","video games"],"wgbreakframes":false,"wgpagecontentlanguage":"en","wgpagecontentmodel":"wikitext","wgseparatortransformtable":["",""],"wgdigittransformtable":["",""],"wgdefaultdateformat":"dmy","wgmonthnames":["","january","february","march","april","may","june","july","august","september","october","november","december"],"wgmonthnamesshort":["","jan","feb","mar","apr","may","jun","jul","aug","sep","oct","nov","dec"],"wgrelevantpagename":"video_game","wgrelevantarticleid":5363,"wgrequestid":"wo@dsapaic4aafdwmr4aaabp","wgisprobablyeditable":false,"wgrestrictionedit":["autoconfirmed"],"wgrestrictionmove":["autoconfirmed"],"wgflaggedrevsparams":{"tags":{}},"wgstablerevisionid":null,"wgwikieditorenabledmodules":{"toolbar":true,"dialogs":true,"preview":false,"publish":false},"wgbetafeaturesfeatures":[],"wgmediavieweronclick":true,"wgmediaviewerenabledbydefault":true,"wgpopupsshouldsendmoduletouser":false,"wgpopupsconflictswithnavpopupgadget":false,"wgvisualeditor":{"pagelanguagecode":"en","pagelanguagedir":"ltr","usepageimages":true,"usepagedescriptions":true},"wgpreferredvariant":"en","wgmfdisplaywikibasedescriptions":{"search":true,"nearby":true,"watchlist":true,"tagline":false},"wgrelatedarticles":null,"wgrelatedarticlesbetafeatureenabled":false,"wgrelatedarticlesusecirrussearch":true,"wgrelatedarticlesonlyusecirrussearch":false,"wgulscurrentautonym":"english","wgnoticeproject":"wikipedia","wgcentralnoticecookiestodelete":[],"wgcentralnoticecategoriesusinglegacy":["fundraising","fundraising"],"wgcategorytreepagecategoryoptions":"{\"mode\":0,\"hideprefix\":20,\"showcount\":true,\"namespaces\":false}","wgwikibaseitemid":"q7889","wgcentralauthmobiledomain":false,"wgvisualeditortoolbarscrolloffset":0,"wgeditsubmitbuttonlabelpublish":false});mw.loader.state({"ext.globalcssjs.user.styles":"ready","ext.globalcssjs.site.styles":"ready","site.styles":"ready","noscript":"ready","user.styles":"ready","user":"ready","user.options":"loading","user.tokens":"loading","ext.cite.styles":"ready","wikibase.client.init":"ready","ext.visualeditor.desktoparticletarget.noscript":"ready","ext.uls.interlanguage":"ready","ext.wikimediabadges":"ready","mediawiki.legacy.shared":"ready","mediawiki.legacy.commonprint":"ready","mediawiki.sectionanchor":"ready","mediawiki.skinning.interface":"ready","skins.vector.styles":"ready","ext.globalcssjs.user":"ready","ext.globalcssjs.site":"ready"});mw.loader.implement("user.options@0j3lz3q",function($,jquery,require,module){mw.user.options.set({"variant":"en"});});mw.loader.implement("user.tokens@1dqfd7l",function ( $, jquery, require, module ) { mw.user.tokens.set({"edittoken":"+\\","patroltoken":"+\\","watchtoken":"+\\","csrftoken":"+\\"});/*@nomin*/; });mw.loader.load(["ext.cite.a11y","mediawiki.toc","mediawiki.action.view.postedit","site","mediawiki.page.startup","mediawiki.user","mediawiki.hidpi","mediawiki.page.ready","mediawiki.legacy.wikibits","mediawiki.searchsuggest","ext.gadget.teahouse","ext.gadget.referencetooltips","ext.gadget.watchlist-notice","ext.gadget.drn-wizard","ext.gadget.charinsert","ext.gadget.reftoolbar","ext.gadget.extra-toolbar-buttons","ext.gadget.switcher","ext.gadget.featured-articles-links","ext.centralauth.centralautologin","mmv.head","mmv.bootstrap.autostart","ext.visualeditor.desktoparticletarget.init","ext.visualeditor.targetloader","ext.eventlogging.subscriber","ext.wikimediaevents","ext.navigationtiming","ext.uls.eventlogger","ext.uls.init","ext.uls.interface","ext.quicksurveys.init","ext.centralnotice.geoip","ext.centralnotice.startup","skins.vector.js"]);}); video game wikipedia, free encyclopedia jump to: navigation, search "video games" redirects here. other uses, see video games (disambiguation). some article's listed sources may reliable. please help article looking better, reliable sources. unreliable citations may challenged deleted. (february 2012) (learn remove template message) people playing large scale version iconic pong video game. part series on: video games platforms arcade game console game game console home console electronic game audio game electronic handheld handheld game handheld console mobile game online game pc game linux mac genres action fighting shooter action-adventure stealth survival horror adventure interactive movie visual novel role-playing action role-playing tactical role-playing simulation sports vehicle strategy real-time turn-based massively multiplayer online related list arcade video games list best-selling video games list best-selling video game franchises list highest-grossing arcade games list video games considered best list video game soundtracks considered best list game year awards list video games notable negative reception development game ai game design interaction design game programming level design video game art video game design video game graphics video game music v e video game electronic game involves interaction user interface generate visual feedback video device tv screen computer monitor. word video video game traditionally referred raster display device, 2000s, implies type display device produce two- three-dimensional images. some theorists categorize video games art form, designation controversial. electronic systems used play video games known platforms; examples personal computers video game consoles. platforms range large mainframe computers small handheld computing devices. specialized video games arcade games, video game components housed large, typically coin-operated chassis, common 1980s video arcades, gradually declined due widespread availability affordable home video game consoles (e.g., playstation 4, xbox one nintendo wii u) video games desktop laptop computers smartphones. input device used games, game controller, varies across platforms. common controllers include gamepads, joysticks, mouse devices, keyboards, touchscreens mobile devices, buttons, even, kinect sensor, person's hands body. players typically view game video screen television computer monitor, sometimes virtual reality head-mounted display goggles. often game sound effects, music and, 2010s, voice actor lines come loudspeakers headphones. some games 2000s include haptic, vibration-creating effects, force feedback peripherals virtual reality headsets. 2010s, video game industry increasing commercial importance, growth driven particularly emerging asian markets mobile games, played smartphones. 2015, video games generated sales usd 74 billion annually worldwide, third-largest segment u.s. entertainment market, behind broadcast cable tv. contents 1 history 2 overview 2.1 platforms 2.1.1 pc 2.1.2 console 2.1.3 handheld 2.1.4 arcade 2.1.5 web browser 2.2 genres 2.3 classifications 2.3.1 casual games 2.3.2 serious games 2.3.3 educational games 2.4 controllers 3 development 3.1 downloadable content 3.1.1 expansion pack 3.2 modifications 3.3 cheating 3.4 glitches 3.5 easter eggs 4 theory 5 emulation 6 social aspects 6.1 demographics 6.2 culture 6.3 multiplayer 6.4 behavioral effects 6.5 objections video games 7 possible benefits 8 ratings censorship 8.1 esrb 8.2 pegi 8.3 germany: bpjm usk 9 commercial aspects 9.1 game sales 9.2 conventions 9.3 esports 10 museums 11 see also 12 notes 13 references 14 external links history main article: history video games see also: early history video games tennis two, early analog computer game used oscilloscope display early games used interactive electronic devices various display formats. earliest example 1947—a "cathode ray tube amusement device" filed patent 25 january 1947, thomas t. goldsmith jr. estle ray mann, issued 14 december 1948, u.s. patent 2455992.[1] inspired radar display technology, consisted analog device allowed user control vector-drawn dot screen simulate missile fired targets, drawings fixed screen.[2] other early examples include: nimrod computer 1951 festival britain; oxo tic-tac-toe computer game alexander s. douglas edsac 1952; tennis two, electronic interactive game engineered william higinbotham 1958; spacewar!, written mit students martin graetz, steve russell, wayne wiitanen's dec pdp-1 computer 1961; hit ping pong-style pong, 1972 game atari. game used different means display: nimrod used panel lights play game nim,[3] oxo used graphical display play tic-tac-toe[4] tennis two used oscilloscope display side view tennis court,[2] spacewar! used dec pdp-1's vector display two spaceships battle other.[5] nolan bushnell game developers conference 2011 1971, computer space, created nolan bushnell ted dabney, first commercially sold, coin-operated video game. used black-and-white television display, computer system made 74 series ttl chips.[6] game featured 1973 science fiction film soylent green. computer space followed 1972 magnavox odyssey, first home console. modeled late 1960s prototype console developed ralph h. baer called "brown box", also used standard television.[2][7] followed two versions atari's pong; arcade version 1972 home version 1975 dramatically increased video game popularity.[8] commercial success pong led numerous other companies develop pong clones systems, spawning video game industry.[9] flood pong clones eventually led video game crash 1977, came end mainstream success taito's 1978 shooter game space invaders,[10] marking beginning golden age arcade video games inspiring dozens manufacturers enter market.[10][11] game inspired arcade machines become prevalent mainstream locations shopping malls, traditional storefronts, restaurants, convenience stores.[12] game also became subject numerous articles stories television newspapers magazines, establishing video gaming rapidly growing mainstream hobby.[13][14] space invaders soon licensed atari vcs (later known atari 2600), becoming first "killer app" quadrupling console's sales.[15] helped atari recover earlier losses,[16] turn atari vcs revived home video game market second generation consoles, north american video game crash 1983.[17] home video game industry revitalized shortly afterwards widespread success nintendo entertainment system,[18] marked shift dominance video game industry united states japan third generation consoles.[19] overview platforms see also: history video games pong, atari 2600 first game console achieve widespread success awareness. term "platform" refers specific combination electronic components computer hardware which, conjunction software, allows video game operate.[20] term "system" also commonly used. distinctions always clear may games bridge one platforms. addition personal computers, other devices ability play games dedicated video game machines, smartphones, pdas graphing calculators. pc common use "pc game" refers form media involves player interacting personal computer connected video monitor. personal computers dedicated game platforms, may differences running game different hardwares, also openness allows some features developers like reduced software cost,[21] increased flexibility, increased innovation, emulation, creation modifications ("mods"), open hosting online gaming (in person plays video game people different household) others. console xbox 360 console controller. "console game" played specialized electronic device connects common television set composite video monitor, unlike pcs, run sorts computer programs, console dedicated video game platform manufactured specific company. usually consoles run games developed it, games other platform made company, never games developed direct competitor, even game available different platforms. often comes specific game controller. major console platforms include xbox playstation. handheld nintendo game boy first successful handheld console, selling 100 million systems. "handheld" gaming device small, self-contained electronic device portable held user's hands. features console, small screen, speakers buttons, joystick other game controllers single unit. like consoles, handhelds dedicated platforms, share almost characteristics. handheld hardware usually less powerful pc console hardwares. some handheld games late 1970s early 1980s could play one game. 1990s 2000s, number handheld games used cartridges, enabled used play many different games. arcade horror-themed arcade game players use light gun. "arcade game" generally refers game played even specialized type electronic device typically designed play one game encased special, large coin-operated cabinet one built-in console, controllers (joystick, buttons, etc.), crt screen, audio amplifier speakers. arcade games often brightly painted logos images relating theme game. arcade games housed vertical cabinet, user typically stands front play, some arcade games use tabletop approach, display screen housed table-style cabinet see-through table top. table-top games, users typically sit play. 1990s 2000s, some arcade games offered players choice multiple games. 1980s, video arcades businesses game players could use number arcade video games. 2010s, far fewer video arcades, some movie theaters family entertainment centers still them. web browser web browser also established platform right 2000s, providing cross-platform environment video games designed played wide spectrum hardware personal computers tablet computers smartphones. turn generated new terms qualify classes web browser-based games. games may identified based website appear, "facebook" games. others named based programming platform used develop them, java flash games. genres main article: video game genre video game, like other forms media, may categorized genres. video game genres used categorize video games based gameplay interaction rather visual narrative differences.[22][23] video game genre defined set gameplay challenges classified independent setting game-world content, unlike other works fiction films books. example, shooter game still shooter game, regardless whether takes place fantasy world outer space.[24][25] genres dependent content definition, genres changed evolved newer styles video games come existence. ever advancing technology production values related video game development fostered lifelike complex games turn introduced enhanced genre possibilities (e.g., virtual pets), pushed boundaries existing video gaming some cases add new possibilities play (such seen titles specifically designed devices like sony's eyetoy). some genres represent combinations others, massively multiplayer online role-playing games, or, commonly, mmorpgs. also common see higher level genre terms collective nature across other genres action, music/rhythm horror-themed video games.[citation needed] classifications casual games main article: casual game casual games derive name ease accessibility, simple understand gameplay quick grasp rule sets. additionally, casual games frequently support ability jump play demand. casual games format existed long term coined include video games solitaire minesweeper commonly found pre-installed many versions microsoft windows operating system. examples genres within category match three, hidden object, time management, puzzle many tower defense style games. casual games generally available app stores online retailers popcap, zylom gamehouse provided free play web portals newgrounds. casual games commonly played personal computers, phones tablets, also found many on-line console system download services (e.g., playstation network, wiiware xbox live). serious games main article: serious game serious games games designed primarily convey information learning experience player. some serious games may even fail qualify video game traditional sense term. educational software typically fall category (e.g., touch typing tutors, language learning programs, etc.) primary distinction would appear based title's primary goal well target age demographics. other categories, description guideline rule. serious games games generally made reasons beyond simple entertainment core casual games may include works given genre, although some exercise games, educational games, propaganda games may higher representation group due subject matter. games typically designed played professionals part specific job skill set improvement. also created convey social-political awareness specific subject. screenshot microsoft flight simulator showing beech 1900d. one longest-running serious games franchises would microsoft flight simulator first published 1982 name. united states military uses virtual reality based simulations, vbs1 training exercises,[26] growing number first responder roles (e.g., police, firefighters, emts).[27] one example non-game environment utilized platform serious game development would virtual world second life, currently used several united states governmental departments (e.g., noaa, nasa, jpl), universities (e.g., ohio university, mit) educational remote learning programs[28] businesses (e.g., ibm, cisco systems) meetings training.[29] tactical media video games plays crucial role making statement conveying message important relevant issues. form media allows broader audience able receive gain access certain information otherwise may reached people. example tactical media video games would newsgames. short games related contemporary events designed illustrate point.[30] example, take action games game studio collective co-founded susana ruiz made successful serious games. some games include darfur dying, finding zoe, balance. games bring awareness important issues events intelligent well thought manner.[31] educational games see also: educational video games educational software vtech educational video game. 23 september 2009, u.s. president barack obama launched campaign called "educate innovate" aimed improving technological, mathematical, scientific engineering abilities american students. campaign states plans harness power interactive games help achieve goal students excelling departments.[32][33] campaign stemmed many new opportunities video game realm contributed many new competitions. some competitions include stem national video game competition imagine cup.[34][35] examples events bring focus relevant important current issues able addressed sense video games educate spread knowledge new form media. www.nobelprize.org uses games entice user learn information pertaining nobel prize achievements engaging fun play video game.[36] many different types styles educational games way counting spelling games kids games adults. some other games particular targeted audience mind intended simply educate inform whoever views plays game. controllers main article: game controller north american super nes game controller early 1990s. video game use several types input devices translate human actions game, common game controllers keyboard mouse "pc games, consoles usually come specific gamepads, handheld consoles built buttons. other game controllers commonly used specific games like racing wheels, light guns dance pads. digital cameras also used game controllers capturing movements body player. technology continues advance, added onto controller give player immersive experience playing different games. some controllers presets buttons mapped certain way make playing certain games easier. along presets, player sometimes custom map buttons better accommodate play style. keyboard mouse, different actions game already preset keys keyboard. games allow player change actions mapped different keys liking. companies design controllers trying make controller visually appealing also feel comfortable hands consumer. example technology incorporated controller touchscreen. allows player able interact game differently before. person could move around menus easier also able interact different objects game. pick some objects, equip others, even move objects players path. another example motion sensor persons movement able captured put game. some motion sensor games based controller is. th reason signal sent ffrom controller console computer actions done create certian movements game. other type motion sensor games webcam style person move around infront actions done repeated character game playing as. development main article: game development see also: video game industry practices developers use various tools create video games. editor fine-tuning virtual camera system. video game development authorship, much like other form entertainment, frequently cross-disciplinary field. video game developers, employees within industry commonly referred, primarily include programmers graphic designers. years expanded include almost every type skill one might see prevalent creation movie television program, including sound designers, musicians, other technicians; well skills specific video games, game designer. managed producers. early days industry, common single person manage roles needed create video game. platforms become complex powerful type material present, larger teams needed generate art, programming, cinematography, more. say age "one-man shop" gone, still sometimes found casual gaming handheld markets,[37] smaller games prevalent due technical limitations limited ram lack dedicated 3d graphics rendering capabilities target platform (e.g., some cellphones pdas).[citation needed] growth size development teams industry, problem cost increased. development studios need able pay staff competitive wage order attract retain best talent, publishers constantly looking keep costs order maintain profitability investment. typically, video game console development team range sizes anywhere 5 50 people, some teams exceeding 100. may 2009, one game project reported development staff 450.[38] growth team size combined greater pressure get completed projects market begin recouping production costs led greater occurrence missed deadlines, rushed games release unfinished products.[39] downloadable content main article: downloadable content phenomenon additional game content later date, often additional funds, began digital video game distribution known downloadable content (dlc). developers use digital distribution issue new storylines main game released, rockstar games grand theft auto iv (the lost damned ballad gay tony), bethesda fallout 3 expansions. new gameplay modes also become available, instance, call duty zombie modes,[40][41][42] multiplayer mode mushroom wars higher difficulty level metro: last light. smaller packages dlc also common, ranging better in-game weapons (dead space, cause 2), character outfits (littlebigplanet, minecraft), new songs perform (singstar, rock band, guitar hero). expansion pack main article: expansion pack variation downloadable content expansion packs. unlike dlc, expansion packs add whole section game either already existed game's code recently developed game already released. expansions add new maps, missions, weapons, other things weren't previously accessible original game. example expansion bungie's recent game, destiny, released rise iron expansion. expansion added new weapons, new maps, higher levels, also remade old missions difficulty would meet new levels added characters. expansions added base game help prolong life game company able produce sequel new game together. developers times plan games life already code expansion game inaccessible players would unlock expansions time went players, sometimes extra cost other times costs extra get expansion. also some developers make game make expansions time goes could see players would like make game better. also expansions set apart original game considered stand-alone game, example ubisoft's expansion assassin's creed iv: black flag freedom's cry takes place control different character original game. modifications main article: mod (computer gaming) many games produced pc designed technically oriented consumers modify game. mods add extra dimension replayability interest. developers id software, valve corporation, crytek, bethesda, epic games blizzard entertainment ship games some development tools used make game, along documentation assist mod developers. internet provides inexpensive medium promote distribute mods, may factor commercial success some games.[43] allows kind success seen popular mods half-life mod counter-strike. cheating main article: cheating (video games) cheating computer games may involve cheat codes hidden spots implemented game developers,[44][45] modification game code third parties,[46][47] players exploiting software glitch. modifications facilitated either cheat cartridge hardware software trainer.[46] cheats usually make game easier providing unlimited amount some resource; example weapons, health, ammunition; perhaps ability walk walls.[45][46] other cheats might give access otherwise unplayable levels provide unusual amusing features, like altered game colors other graphical appearances. glitches main article: glitch software errors detected software testers development find way released versions computer video games. may happen glitch occurs unusual circumstances game, deemed minor correct, game development hurried meet publication deadline. glitches range minor graphical errors serious bugs delete saved data cause game malfunction. some cases publishers release updates (referred patches) repair glitches. sometimes glitch may beneficial player; often referred exploits. easter eggs easter eggs hidden messages jokes left games developers part main game.[48] easter eggs secret responses occur result undocumented set commands. results vary simple printed message image, page programmer credits small videogame hidden inside otherwise serious piece software. videogame cheat codes specific type easter egg, entering secret command unlock special powers new levels player.[49][50] theory main article: game studies although departments computer science studying technical aspects video games years, theories examine games artistic medium relatively recent development humanities. two visible schools emerging field ludology narratology. narrativists approach video games context janet murray calls "cyberdrama". say, major concern video games storytelling medium, one arises interactive fiction. murray puts video games context holodeck, fictional piece technology star trek, arguing video game medium player allowed become another person, act another world.[51] image video games received early widespread popular support, forms basis films tron, existenz last starfighter. ludologists break sharply radically idea. argue video game first foremost game, must understood terms rules, interface, concept play deploys. espen j. aarseth argues that, although games certainly plots, characters, aspects traditional narratives, aspects incidental gameplay. example, aarseth critical widespread attention narrativists given heroine game tomb raider, saying "the dimensions lara croft's body, already analyzed death film theorists, irrelevant player, different-looking body would make play differently... play, don't even see body, see past it."[52] simply put, ludologists reject traditional theories art claim artistic socially relevant qualities video game primarily determined underlying set rules, demands, expectations imposed player. many games rely emergent principles, video games commonly present simulated story worlds emergent behavior occurs within context game. term "emergent narrative" used describe how, simulated environment, storyline created simply "what happens player."[53] however, emergent behavior limited sophisticated games. general, place event-driven instructions occur ai game, emergent behavior exist. instance, take racing game cars programmed avoid crashing, encounter obstacle track: cars might maneuver avoid obstacle causing cars behind slow and/or maneuver accommodate cars front obstacle. programmer never wrote code specifically create traffic jam, yet one exists game. emulation main article: video game console emulator project64, nintendo emulator, running star fox 64 windows 8 platform. emulator program replicates behavior video game console, allowing games run different platform original hardware. emulators exist pcs, smartphones consoles other original. emulators generally used play old games, hack existing games, translate unreleased games specific region, add enhanced features games like improved graphics, speed down, bypass regional lockouts, online multiplayer support. some manufacturers released official emulators consoles. example, virtual console allows users play games old nintendo consoles wii, wii u, 3ds. virtual console part nintendo's strategy deterring video game piracy.[54] november 2015, microsoft launched backwards compatibility xbox 360 games xbox one console via emulation.[55] also, sony announced relaunching ps2 games ps4 via emulation.[56] according sony computer entertainment america v. bleem, creating emulator proprietary video game console legal.[57] however, nintendo claims emulators promote distribution illegally copied games.[58] social aspects demographics see also: gamer §demographics november 2005 nielsen active gamer study, taking survey 2,000 regular gamers, found u.s. games market diversifying. age group among male players expanded significantly 25–40 age group. casual online puzzle-style simple mobile cell phone games, gender divide less equal men women. recently growing segment female players engaged aggressive style games historically considered fall within traditionally male genres (e.g., first-person shooters). according esrb, almost 41% pc gamers women.[59] participation among african-americans even lower. one survey 2000 game developers returned responses 2.5% identified black.[60] see also: women video games see also: race video games comparing today's industry climate 20 years ago, women many adults inclined using products industry. market teen young adult men still strong market, other demographics posting significant growth. entertainment software association (esa) provides following summary 2011 based study almost 1,200 american households carried ipsos mediact:[61] average gamer 30 years old playing 12 years. eighty-two percent gamers 18 years age older. forty-two percent players women women 18 years age one industry's fastest growing demographics. twenty-nine percent game players age 50, increase nine percent 1999. sixty-five percent gamers play games other gamers person. fifty-five percent gamers play games phones handheld device. 2006 academic study, based survey answered 10,000 gamers, identified gaymers (gamers identify gay) demographic group.[62][63][64] follow-up survey 2009 studied purchase habits content preferences people group.[65][66][67] based study npd group 2011, approximately 91 percent children aged 2–17 play games.[68] culture main article: video game culture video game culture worldwide new media subculture formed around video games game playing. computer video games increased popularity time, significant influence popular culture. video game culture also evolved time hand hand internet culture well increasing popularity mobile games. many people play video games identify gamers, mean anything someone enjoys games someone passionate it. video games become social multiplayer online capability, gamers find growing social networks. gaming entertainment well competition, new trend known electronic sports becoming widely accepted. 2010s, video games discussions video game trends topics seen social media, politics, television, film music. multiplayer main article: multiplayer video game video gaming traditionally social experience. multiplayer video games played either competitively, sometimes electronic sports, cooperatively using either multiple input devices, hotseating. tennis two, arguably first video game, two player game, successor pong. first commercially available game console, magnavox odyssey, two controller inputs. since then, consoles shipped two four controller inputs. some ability expand four, eight many 12 inputs additional adapters, multitap. multiplayer arcade games typically feature play two four players, sometimes tilting monitor back top-down viewing experience allowing players sit opposite one another. many early computer games non-pc descendant based platforms featured multiplayer support. personal computer systems atari commodore regularly featured least two game ports. pc-based computer games started lower availability multiplayer options technical limitations. pcs typically either one game ports all. network games early personal computers generally limited text based adventures muds played remotely dedicated server. due slow speed modems (300-1200-bit/s), prohibitive cost involved putting computer online way multiple visitors could make use it. however, advent widespread local area networking technologies internet based online capabilities, number players modern games 32 higher, sometimes featuring integrated text and/or voice chat. massively multiplayer online game (mmos) offer extremely high numbers simultaneous players; eve online set record 65,303 players single server 2013.[69] behavioral effects main article: video game behavioral effects shown action video game players better hand–eye coordination visuo-motor skills, resistance distraction, sensitivity information peripheral vision ability count briefly presented objects, nonplayers.[70] researchers found enhanced abilities could acquired training action games, involving challenges switch attention different locations, games requiring concentration single objects. suggested studies online/offline video gaming used therapeutic tool treatment different mental health concerns.[which?] steven johnson's book, everything bad good you, argues video games fact demand far player traditional games like monopoly. experience game, player must first determine objectives, well complete them. must learn game controls human-machine interface works, including menus huds. beyond skills, some time become quite fundamental taken granted many gamers, video games based upon player navigating (and eventually mastering) highly complex system many variables. requires strong analytical ability, well flexibility adaptability. argues process learning boundaries, goals, controls given game often highly demanding one calls many different areas cognitive function. indeed, games require great deal patience focus player, and, contrary popular perception games provide instant gratification, games actually delay gratification far longer other forms entertainment film even many books.[71] some research suggests video games may even increase players' attention capacities.[72] learning principles found video games identified possible techniques reform u.s. education system.[73] noticed gamers adopt attitude playing high concentration, realize learning, attitude could adopted school, education would enjoy significant benefits.[74] students found "learning doing" playing video games fostering creative thinking.[75] u.s. army deployed machines packbot uav vehicles, make use game-style hand controller make familiar young people.[76] according research discussed 2008 convention american psychological association, certain types video games improve gamers' dexterity well ability problem solving. study 33 laparoscopic surgeons found played video games 27 percent faster advanced surgical procedures made 37 percent fewer errors compared play video games. second study 303 laparoscopic surgeons (82 percent men; 18 percent women) also showed surgeons played video games requiring spatial skills hand dexterity performed drill testing skills significantly faster first attempt across 10 trials surgeons play video games first.[77] research showing benefits action games questioned due methodological shortcomings, recruitment strategies selection bias, potential placebo effects, lack baseline improvements control groups.[78] addition, many studies cross-sectional, longitudinal interventional trials, found effects.[78] response pointed skill improvements action games broad predicted, mental rotation, common task action games.[79] action gamers better ignoring distractions, also focusing main task.[80] objections video games main article: video game controversies like other media, rock music (notably heavy metal music gangsta rap), video games subject objections, controversies censorship, instance depictions violence, criminal activities, sexual themes, alcohol, tobacco other drugs, propaganda, profanity advertisements. critics video games include parents' groups, politicians, religious groups, scientists other advocacy groups. claims some video games cause addiction violent behavior continue made disputed.[81] number societal scientific arguments whether content video games change behavior attitudes player, whether reflected video game culture overall. since early 1980s, advocates video games emphasized use expressive medium, arguing protection laws governing freedom speech also educational tool. detractors argue video games harmful therefore subject legislative oversight restrictions. positive negative characteristics effects video games subject scientific study. results investigations links video games addiction, aggression, violence, social development, variety stereotyping sexual morality issues debated.[82] video game contains large amounts violence cause person behave aggressively. study done showed young people greater exposure violence video games ended behaving aggressively towards people social environment.[83] possible benefits spite negative effects video games, certain studies indicate may value terms academic performance, perhaps skills developed process. “when play ... games you’re solving puzzles move next level involves using some general knowledge skills maths, reading science you’ve taught day,” said alberto posso associate professor royal melbourne institute technology, analysing data results standardized testing completed 12,000 high school students across australia. summarized guardian,[84] study [published international journal communication], "found students played online games almost every day scored 15 points average maths reading tests 17 points average science." however, reporter added important comment provided some numerous web sites published brief summary australian study study: "[the] methodology cannot prove playing video games cause improvement." guardian also reported columbia university study indicated extensive video gaming students 6 11 age group provided greatly increased chance high intellectual functioning overall school competence. interview cnn, edward castronova, professor telecommunications indiana university bloomington said surprised outcome australian study also discussed issue causal connection. "though link gaming higher math science scores, doesn't mean playing games caused higher scores. could kids sharp looking challenge, don't find social media, maybe find board games video games," explained.[85] video games also proven raise self-esteem build confidence. gives people opportunity things cannot offline, discover new things themselves. social aspect gaming well – research shown third video game players make good friends online. well that, video games also considered therapeutic helps relieve stress.[86] although short term, studies shown children developmental delays gain temporary physical improvement health interact play video games regular, consistent basis due cognitive benefits use hand eye coordination[87] ratings censorship examples perspective section deal primarily western culture represent worldwide view subject. may improve article, discuss issue talk page, create new article, appropriate. (september 2014) (learn remove template message) main article: video game content rating system esrb typical esrb rating label, listing rating specific content descriptors rabbids go home. entertainment software rating board (esrb) gives video games maturity ratings based content. example, game might rated teen game contained obscene words violence. game contains explicit violence sexual themes, likely receive mature rating, means one 17 play it. rated "a/o" games "adults only" games massive violence nudity. laws prohibit children purchasing "m" rated games united states. laws attempting prohibit minors purchasing "m" rated games established california, illinois, michigan, minnesota, louisiana, overturned grounds laws violated first amendment.[88] however, many stores opted sell games children anyway. course, video game laws vary country country. one controversial games time, manhunt 2 rockstar studios, given ao rating esrb rockstar could make content suitable mature audience. video game manufacturers usually exercise tight control games made available systems, unusual special-interest games likely appear pc games. free, casual, browser-based games usually played available computers, mobile phones, tablet computers pdas. pegi pan european game information (pegi) system developed standardize game ratings europe (not european union, although majority eu members), current members are: eu members, except germany 10 accession states; norway; switzerland. iceland expected join soon, 10 eu accession states. pegi members, use sole system, exception uk, game contains certain material,[89] must rated bbfc. pegi ratings legally binding vienna criminal offence sell game someone rated age.[90] germany: bpjm usk stricter game rating laws mean germany operate within pegi. instead, adopt system certification required law. unterhaltungssoftware selbstkontrolle (usk voluntary certification entertainment software) checks every game release assigns age rating – either none (white), 6 years age (yellow), 12 years age (green), 16 years age (blue) 18 years age (red). forbidden anyone, retailers, friends parents alike, allow child access game underage. game considered harmful young people (for example extremely violent, pornographic racist content), may referred bpjm (bundesprüfstelle für jugendgefährdende medien – federal verification office child-endangering media) may opt place index upon game may sold openly advertised open media. indexed titles "banned" still legally obtained adults, considered felony supply titles child. commercial aspects game sales see also: video game industry, list best-selling video games, golden age arcade video games retail display large selection games platforms popular early 2000s according market research firm superdata, may 2015, global games market worth usd 74.2 billion. region, north america accounted $23.6 billion, asia $23.1 billion, europe $22.1 billion south america $4.5 billion. market segment, mobile games worth $22.3 billion, retail games 19.7 billion, free-to-play mmos 8.7 billion, social games $7.9 billion, pc dlc 7.5 billion, other categories $3 billion less each.[91][92] united states, also according superdata, share video games entertainment market grew 5% 1985 13% 2015, becoming third-largest market segment behind broadcast cable television. research firm anticipated asia would soon overtake north america largest video game market due strong growth free-to-play mobile games.[92] sales different types games vary widely countries due local preferences. japanese consumers tend purchase much console games computer games, strong preference games catering local tastes.[citation needed] another key difference that, despite decline arcades west, arcade games remain largest sector japanese gaming industry.[citation needed] south korea, computer games generally preferred console games, especially mmorpg games real-time strategy games. computer games also popular china.[93] conventions see also: list gaming conventions gamescom fair cologne. gaming conventions important showcase industry. annual gamescom cologne august world's leading expo video games attendance.[94] e3 june los angeles also global importance, event industry insiders only.[95] tokyo game show september main fair asia. other notable conventions trade fairs include brasil game show october, paris games week october–november, eb games expo (australia) october, kri, chinajoy july annual game developers conference. some publishers, developers technology producers also host regular conventions, blizzcon, quakecon, nvision x shows prominent examples. esports main article: esports short electronic sports, video game competitions played professional players individually teams gained pupularity late 2000s, common genres fighting, first-person shooter (fps), multiplayer online battle arena (moba) real-time strategy. certain games made competitive multiplayer purposes. type games, players focus entirely one choosing right character obtaining right equipment game help facing other players. tournaments held people area different regions play other players game see best. major league gaming (mlg) company reports tournaments held across country. players compete tournaments given rank depending skill level game choose play face other players play game. players also compete mostly called professional players fact played game competing many, long hours. players able come different strategies facing different characters. professional players able pick character liking able master use character effectively. strategy games, players tend know get resources quick able make quick decisions troops deployed kind troops create. museums gaming consoles computer games museum berlin many video game museums around world, including computer games museum berlin[96] museum soviet arcade machines moscow saint-petersburg.[97][98] museum art digital entertainment oakland, california dedicated video game museum focusing playable exhibits console computer games.[99] video game museum rome also dedicated preserving video games history.[100] international center history electronic games strong rochester, new york contains one largest collections electronic games game-related historical materials world, including 5,000-square-foot (460m2) exhibit allows guests play way history video games.[101][102][103] smithsonian institution washington, d.c. three video games permanent display: pac-man, dragon's lair, pong.[104] museum modern art added total 20 video games one video game console permanent architecture design collection since 2012.[105][106] 2012, smithsonian american art museum ran exhibition "the art video games".[107] however, reviews exhibit mixed, including questioning whether video games belong art museum.[108][109] see also video games portal book: video game history video games list video games outline video games video game addiction notes ^ u.s. patent 2,455,992 ^ b c "welcome pong-story – introduction". pong-story.com. retrieved 2007-10-24. ^ "welcome to... nimrod!". retrieved 2007-10-24. ^ winter, david. "a.s.douglas' 1952 noughts crosses game". pong-story. retrieved 2009-07-03. ^ rabin, steve (2005) [2005-06-14]. introduction game development. massachusetts: charles river media. isbn1-58450-377-7. ^ marvin yagoda (2008). "1972 nutting associates computer space". archived original 28 december 2008. ^ orlando, greg (15 may 2007). "console portraits: 40-year pictorial history gaming". wired news. retrieved 2007-10-24. ^ "history gaming – interactive timeline game history". pbs. retrieved 2007-10-25. ^ miller, michael (1 april 2005). "a history home video game consoles". informit. archived original 12 october 2007. retrieved 2007-10-25. ^ b whittaker, jason (2004). cyberspace handbook. routledge. p.122. isbn0-415-16835-x ^ kent, steven l. (2001). ultimate history video games: pong pokémon. three rivers press. p.500. isbn0-7615-3643-4. ^ edge staff (13 august 2007). "the 30 defining moments gaming". edge. future plc. archived original 29 october 2011. retrieved 2008-09-18. ^ "atari offers largest game library" (pdf). electronic games. vol.1 no.1. winter 1981. pp.40–41 [41]. retrieved 1 february 2012. ^ "players guide electronic science fiction games". electronic games. vol.1 no.2. march 1982. pp.35–45 [36]. retrieved 1 february 2012. ^ "the definitive space invaders". retro gamer. no.41. imagine publishing. september 2007. pp.24–33. retrieved 2011-04-20. ^ nick montfort ian bogost (2009). racing beam: atari video computer system. mit press. p.66. isbn0-262-01257-x. retrieved 2011-05-01 ^ jason whittaker (2004). cyberspace handbook. routledge. pp.122–3. isbn0-415-16835-x ^ consalvo, mia (2006). "console video games global corporations: creating hybrid culture" (pdf). new media society. 8 (1): 117–137. doi:10.1177/1461444806059921. archived original (pdf) 28 february 2008. ^ arnie katz; bill kunkel; joyce worley (august 1988). "video gaming world". computer gaming world. p.44. i'm sure you've noticed i've made reference nintendo craze repeated atari mattel phenomenon 8 years ago. that's american game designers nintendo non-event: virtually work date done japan. future tell design process ever crosses pacific efficiently container ships letters credit do. ^ "platform - definitions dictionary.com". dictionary.com. retrieved 2007-11-03. ^ lane, rick (13 december 2011). "is pc gaming really expensive consoles?". retrieved 9 august 2016. ^ apperley, thomas h. (2006). "genre game studies" (pdf). simulation gaming. 37 (1): 6–23. doi:10.1177/1046878105282278. retrieved 2013-04-19. ^ adams, ernest (2009-07-09). "background: origins game genres". gamasutra. retrieved 2014-12-03. ^ adams, ernest; andrew rollings (2006). fundamentals game design. prentice hall. p.67. ^ harteveld, casper (2011-02-26). triadic game design: balancing reality, meaning play. springer science business media. p.71. isbn1849961573. retrieved 2014-12-19. ^ "how virtual reality military applications work". retrieved 2009-11-24. ^ *anne derryberry, "definition serious games adobe.com august 2007 ^ "serious games virtual worlds: future enterprise business intelligence". retrieved 2009-11-24. ^ "using second life business-to-business tool". archived original 2009-05-12. retrieved 2009-11-24. ^ ""newsgames: procedural rhetoric meets political cartoons" mike treanor michael mateas" (pdf). ^ "take action games". retrieved 9 august 2016. ^ "educate innovate | white house". whitehouse.gov. ^ "president obama launches "educate innovate" campaign excellence science, technology, engineering math (stem) education | white house". whitehouse.gov. 23 november 2009. ^ "video game competitions expand stem learning united states". district columbia: prnewswire.com. ^ "imagine cup student competition – support faq's". web.archive.org. 22 august 2008. archived original 2008-08-22. ^ "educational games". nobelprize.org. ^ "the edge reason?". eurogamer.net. retrieved 2009-11-16. ^ "assassin's creed ii dev team triples size", christopher reynolds, 18 may 2009, gamer. archived 16 july 2015 wayback machine. ^ schreier, jason. "the messy, true story behind making destiny". kotaku. retrieved 2016-11-15. ^ [1], giant bomb. ^ "archived copy". archived original 5 january 2011. retrieved 23 july 2011. cs1 maint: unfit url (link), bethesda. ^ [2], gilbert, ben, 11 apr 2011, joystiq. ^ "hollywood reporter interviewing doug lombardi, quote: "mods absolutely helped us drive huge sales 'half-life'"". archived original 6 may 2008. retrieved 10 august 2009. cs1 maint: unfit url (link). ^ vargas, jose antonio (28 august 2006). "in game world, cheaters proudly prosper". washington post. retrieved 2007-10-24. ^ b 1up staff. "cracking code: konami code". 1up.com. retrieved 2007-10-24. ^ b c rybka, jason. "video game cheats codes – cheat codes?". about.com. retrieved 2007-10-24. ^ rybka, jason. "why use cheats codes console pc games?". about.com. retrieved 2007-10-24. ^ "easter egg definition". dictionary.com. retrieved 18 june 2015. ^ wolf, mark j. p. (2012). encyclopedia video games: culture, technology, art gaming. abc-clio. p.177. isbn9780313379369. ^ björk, staffan; holopainen, jussi (2005). patterns game design. charles river media. p. 235. isbn 978-1584503545. retrieved january 25, 2013. ^ murray 1998. ^ aarseth, espen j. (21 may 2004). "genre trouble". electronic book review. retrieved 2006-06-14. ^ "ign: gdc 2004: warren spector talks games narrative". xbox.ign.com. ^ "nintendo anti-piracy - frequently asked questions (faqs)". retrieved 9 august 2016. ^ "here 'new' backwards-compatible xbox 360 games xbox one". 17 december 2015. retrieved 9 august 2016. ^ "sony wants input ps2 emulation games ps4". 16 december 2015. retrieved 9 august 2016. ^ "sony computer entertainment america v. bleem, 214 f. 3d 1022". 9th circuit 2000. google scholar. court appeals (published 4 may 2000). 14 february 2000. retrieved 15 june 2016. ^ "legal information (copyrights, emulators, roms, etc.)". nintendo america, inc. retrieved 16 june 2016. ^ guy, hannah (2007). "women video gamers: solitaire". pc world canada. archived original 12 march 2007. ^ "gaming black: casual racism cautious optimism". engadget. retrieved 2016-02-16. ^ esa. "game player data". ^ sliwinski, alexander (10 june 2006). "first-ever survey gay videogamers". washington blade. archived original 18 june 2006. ^ sliwinski, alexander (8 june 2006). "gay video game player survey". newsweekly. archived original 1 january 2009. ^ sliwinski, alexander. "gay gamer survey results large hetero inclusion". joystiq. ^ sliwinski, alexander (8 october 2009). "new 'gaymer' survey explores sexual identity, interest games". joystiq.com. ^ fahey, mike (8 october 2009). "what gay gamers want games?". kotaku.com. ^ hyman, jamie (3 september 2009). "orlando student conducts gay gamer survey". orlando watermark. archived original 1 november 2012. ^ "91% kids aged 2–17 playing video games, says report". retrieved 12 october 2011. ^ "eve online smashes pcu record anniversary celebrations". massively.joystiq.com. ^ green, c. shawn; bavelier, daphne (2003). "action video game modifies visual selective attention". nature. 423 (6939): 534–537. doi:10.1038/nature01647. pmid12774121. green bavelier. ^ gladwell, malcolm. "brain candy". new yorker. ^ daphne bavelier; et al. (2003). "action video game modifies visual selective attention" (pdf). nature/university rochester. archived original (pdf) 29 march 2006. retrieved 29 april 2006. ^ gee, james paul (2003). video games teach us literacy learning. palgrave macmillan. isbn1-4039-6169-7. ^ james paul gee; et al. (2007). "wired 11.05: view". codenet, inc. retrieved 4 december 2007. ^ glazer, s. (2006). "video games". cq researcher. 16: 960–937. cqresrre2006111000. ^ "irobot receives new military orders 14 packbot robots". 2007. retrieved 25 july 2007. ^ playing video games offers learning across life span newswise. retrieved 17 august 2008. ^ b boot wr, blakely dp, simons dj (2011). "do action video games improve perception cognition?". front psychol. 2: 226. doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2011.00226. pmc3171788. pmid21949513. ^ green cs, bavelier (march 2012). "learning, attentional control, action video games". curr. biol. 22 (6): r197–206. doi:10.1016/j.cub.2012.02.012. pmc3461277. pmid22440805. ^ chisholm, hickey, theeuwes kingston, 2010 ^ "video games supreme court: lessons scientific community wake brown v ema, 2011" (pdf). american psychological association. march 2013. ^ freedman j. "media violence effect aggression: assessing scientific evidence." university toronto press, toronto 2002 isbn 0-8020-8425-7. ^ wood, wendy; wong, frank y.; chachere, j. gregory (1991-05-01). "effects media violence viewers' aggression unconstrained social interaction.". psychological bulletin. 109 (3): 371–383. doi:10.1037/0033-2909.109.3.371. issn1939-1455. ^ gibbs, samuel (august 8, 2016). "positive link video games academic performance, study suggests". guardian. london, uk. retrieved august 9, 2016. ^ scutti, susan (august 8, 2016). "teen gamers better math social media stars, study says". cnn health. retrieved august 9, 2016. video games' bad reputation may unfair. teens regular gamers scored higher average math, reading science international exam, new study found. ^ griffiths, mark (2010). "online video gaming: education psychologists know?". education psychology practice. 26 (1): 35–40. ^ hsieh r, lee w lin j, 'the impact short-term video games performance among children developmental delays: randomized controlled trial' (2016) 11 plos one ^ mccauley, dennis. "the political game: brief history video game legislation". joystiq.com. joystiq.com. retrieved 20 january 2013. ^ "classification: guidelines: introduction". british board film classification. archived original 2011-05-25. retrieved 23 november 2011. bbfc classifies video works released video recordings video recordings act 1984. (the video games covered vra whose exemption forfeited section 2(2) depict human sexual activity, gross violence other matters concern.) ^ "pan european game information" (in german). bundesstelle für die positivprädikatisierung von computer- und konsolenspielen. archived original 17 september 2013. retrieved 23 november 2011. eine kennzeichung mit der pegi-altersempfehlung ist wien seit april 2008 verpflichtend: es dürfen nur spiele verkauft werden, die eine pegi-kennzeichnung tragen. und es dürfen die spiele nur jugendliche verkauft werden, wenn diese zumindest das alter gemäß pegi-kennzeichung erreicht haben. bis ende 2009 gilt der Übergangsfrist alternativ auch die kennzeichnung der usk. ^ newman, heather (20 may 2015). "games poised outstrip broadcast tv revenues, superdata finds". venturebeat. retrieved 31 may 2015. ^ b superdata research (may 2015). global games market report may 2015. ^ usher, william (11 march 2012). "pc game sales top $18.6 billion 2011". gaming blend. cinema blend. retrieved 17 march 2012. ^ tatár, susanna (14 august 2014). "how nvidia going big gamescom, world's biggest gaming show". nvidia. retrieved 17 september 2014. ^ "e3 obsolete, doesn't matter". forbes. 2012-06-08. retrieved 2012-10-18. ^ "computerspielemuseum – berlin". computerspielemuseum.de. ^ "museum soviet arcade machines". 15kop.ru. ^ "red penguin: review museum soviet arcade machines". redpenguin.net. ^ "about made". themade.org. ^ "vigamus". vigamus.com. ^ wolf, mark j. p., ed. (2012). "international center history electronic games (icheg)". encyclopedia video games: culture, technology, art gaming. p.329. ^ jacobs, stephen (2010-11-22). "strong's egamerevolution exhibit gives game history first permanent home". gamasutra. retrieved 2013-05-26. ^ "egamerevolution". international center history electronic games. retrieved 2013-05-26. ^ "history computing: video games - golden age". thocp.net. ^ anttonelli, paola (2012-11-29). "video games: 14 collection, starters". moma. archived original 2015-09-08. ^ galloway, paul (2013-06-23). "video games: seven building blocks moma's collection". moma. archived original 2015-09-08. ^ "exhibitions: art video games / american art". americanart.si.edu. retrieved 2012-07-08. ^ barron, christina (april 29, 2012). "museum exhibit asks: art push 'start'?". washington post. retrieved 2013-02-12. ^ kennicott, philip (march 18, 2012). "the art video games". washington post. retrieved 2013-02-12. references blodget, henry (12 april 2005). "how solve china's piracy problem". slate.com. retrieved 12 february 2006. costikyan, greg (1994). "i words must design". crawford, chris (1982). "the art computer game design". lieu, tina (august 1997). "where pc games gone?". computing japan. archived original 12 january 1998. murray, janet (1998). hamlet holodeck. mit press. isbn0-262-63187-3. pursell, carroll (2015). playgrounds playstation: interaction technology play. baltimore, md: johns hopkins university press. salen, katie; eric zimmerman (2005). game design reader: rules play anthology. mit press. isbn0-262-19536-4. smuts, aaron (2005). "are video games art?". winegarner, beth (28 january 2005). "game sales hit record highs". gamespot. retrieved 12 february 2006. john wills (1 october 2002). "digital dinosaurs artificial life: exploring culture nature computer video games". cultural values (journal cultural research). routledge. 6 (4): 395–417. doi:10.1080/1362517022000047334. williams, j. p., smith, j. h., eds. (2007). players' realm: studies culture video games gaming. jefferson, n.c.: mcfarland co. external links find aboutvideo gamesat wikipedia's sister projects definitions wiktionary media commons news wikinews quotations wikiquote texts wikisource textbooks wikibooks learning resources wikiversity library resources video game resources library resources other libraries video games bibliography french video game research association ludoscience virtual museum computing (vmoc) v e types games chance guessing party role-playing skill sport strategy street tabletop video list types games v e video game genres list action beat 'em hack slash fighting maze pac-man clone platform shooter first-person third-person light gun shoot 'em tactical action-adventure grand theft auto clone immersive sim metroidvania stealth survival horror adventure escape room interactive fiction interactive movie point n' click survival visual novel mmo mmofps mmorpg mmorts role-playing action role-playing dungeon crawl mud roguelike tactical role-playing simulation construction management business city government life simulation dating sim digital pet god social simulation sports strategy 4x moba real-time strategy tower defense time management real-time tactics turn-based strategy turn-based tactics artillery wargame vehicle simulation flight simulator amateur combat space racing kart racing sim racing submarine simulator train simulator other genres breakout clone exergame incremental music rhythm non-game party programming puzzle sokoban tile-matching related concepts advertising arcade game art game audio game casual game christian game crossover game cult game educational game fmv gamification indie game nonlinear gameplay open world nonviolent video game online game browser game multiplayer online game social network game serious game toys-to-life traditional game twitch gameplay video game clone v e history video games system arcade game history golden age arcade video games timeline arcade video game history video game console history north american video game crash 1983 pc game history early mainframe games year early history 1947–1972 1970s 1972 1973 1974 1975 1976 1977 1978 1979 1980s 1980 1981 1982 1983 1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990s 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000s 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010s 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 near future console generation first (1972–1980) second (1976–1992) third (1983–2003) fourth (1987–2003) fifth (1993–2005) sixth (1998–2013) seventh (2005–) eighth (2012–) genre action game history action-adventure game history adventure game history history role-playing video games sports game history strategy video game history region australia bangladesh belgium brazil canada china colombia czech republic finland france germany ghana india ireland lithuania japan kenya malaysia netherlands new zealand nigeria philippines russia south africa south korea thailand ukraine united kingdom united states authority control gnd: 4010457-6 retrieved "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=video_gameoldid=774930275" categories: digital mediavideo gameshidden categories: articles inconsistent citation formatswebarchive template wayback linkscs1 maint: unfit urlcs1 german-language sources (de)pages using isbn magic linkswikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pagesuse dmy dates september 2012articles lacking reliable references february 2012all articles lacking reliable referencesall articles unsourced statementsarticles unsourced statements september 2015articles unsourced statements september 2009all articles specifically marked weasel-worded phrasesarticles specifically marked weasel-worded phrases august 2009articles limited geographic scope september 2014western culture-centricarticles unsourced statements may 2015articles prone spam october 2013wikipedia articles gnd identifiers navigation menu personal tools logged intalkcontributionscreate accountlog namespaces article talk variants views read view source view history search navigation main pagecontentsfeatured contentcurrent eventsrandom articledonate wikipediawikipedia store interaction helpabout wikipediacommunity portalrecent changescontact page tools links hererelated changesupload filespecial pagespermanent linkpage informationwikidata itemcite page print/export create bookdownload pdfprintable version other projects wikimedia commonswikiquote languages afrikaansalemannischÆngliscالعربيةaragonésasturianuazərbaycancaবাংলাbân-lâm-gúБеларускаяБеларуская (тарашкевіца)‎БългарскиbosanskibrezhonegcatalàČeštinadanskdeutscheestiΕλληνικάemiliàn e rumagnòlespañolesperantoeuskaraفارسیføroysktfrançaisfryskgalego한국어Հայերենहिन्दीhrvatskiidobahasa indonesiainterlinguaÍslenskaitalianoעבריתქართულიҚазақшаlatinalatviešulëtzebuergeschlietuviųlimburgslingálala .lojban.lumbaartmagyarМакедонскиമലയാളംمازِرونیbahasa melayuМонголnederlands日本語norsk bokmålnorsk nynorskoccitanoʻzbekcha/ўзбекчаpatoispolskiportuguêsromânăruna simiРусскийСаха тылаsarduscotsseelterskshqipsicilianusimple englishslovenčinaslovenščinaСрпски / srpskisrpskohrvatski / српскохрватскиsuomisvenskatagalogதமிழ்ไทยТоҷикӣtürkçeУкраїнськаاردوtiếng việtwinarayייִדיש粵語zazakiŽemaitėška中文 edit links page last modified 11 april 2017, 15:39. text available creative commons attribution-sharealike license; additional terms may apply. using site, agree terms use privacy policy. wikipedia® registered trademark wikimedia foundation, inc., non-profit organization. privacy policy wikipedia disclaimers contact wikipedia developers cookie statement mobile view (window.rlq=window.rlq||[]).push(function(){mw.config.set({"wgpageparsereport":{"limitreport":{"cputime":"1.020","walltime":"1.191","ppvisitednodes":{"value":6589,"limit":1000000},"ppgeneratednodes":{"value":0,"limit":1500000},"postexpandincludesize":{"value":276426,"limit":2097152},"templateargumentsize":{"value":5154,"limit":2097152},"expansiondepth":{"value":12,"limit":40},"expensivefunctioncount":{"value":13,"limit":500},"entityaccesscount":{"value":1,"limit":400},"timingprofile":["100.00% 974.090 1 -total"," 46.92% 457.017 1 template:reflist"," 26.43% 257.448 73 template:cite_web"," 6.67% 64.955 5 template:fix"," 6.16% 59.971 4 template:citation_needed"," 4.83% 47.061 1 template:pp-semi"," 4.49% 43.749 13 template:cite_book"," 4.39% 42.773 1 template:convert"," 3.99% 38.833 9 template:cite_journal"," 3.90% 37.958 5 template:delink"]},"scribunto":{"limitreport-timeusage":{"value":"0.533","limit":"10.000"},"limitreport-memusage":{"value":10059433,"limit":52428800}},"cachereport":{"origin":"mw1300","timestamp":"20170411153957","ttl":2592000,"transientcontent":false}}});});(window.rlq=window.rlq||[]).push(function(){mw.config.set({"wgbackendresponsetime":88,"wghostname":"mw1176"});});