Everglades - Wikipedia document.documentElement.className = document.documentElement.className.replace( /(^|\s)client-nojs(\s|$)/, "$1client-js$2" ); (window.RLQ=window.RLQ||[]).push(function(){mw.config.set({"wgCanonicalNamespace":"","wgCanonicalSpecialPageName":false,"wgNamespaceNumber":0,"wgPageName":"Everglades","wgTitle":"Everglades","wgCurRevisionId":774352093,"wgRevisionId":774352093,"wgArticleId":87003,"wgIsArticle":true,"wgIsRedirect":false,"wgAction":"view","wgUserName":null,"wgUserGroups":["*"],"wgCategories":["CS1 maint: Explicit al.","Pages using ISBN magic links","Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages","Coordinates Wikidata","Good articles","Everglades","Flooded grasslands savannas","Neotropic ecoregions","Ecoregions Florida","Marshes Florida","Swamps Florida","Biodiversity hotspots","Natural regions","Wetlands Florida"],"wgBreakFrames":false,"wgPageContentLanguage":"en","wgPageContentModel":"wikitext","wgSeparatorTransformTable":["",""],"wgDigitTransformTable":["",""],"wgDefaultDateFormat":"dmy","wgMonthNames":["","January","February","March","April","May","June","July","August","September","October","November","December"],"wgMonthNamesShort":["","Jan","Feb","Mar","Apr","May","Jun","Jul","Aug","Sep","Oct","Nov","Dec"],"wgRelevantPageName":"Everglades","wgRelevantArticleId":87003,"wgRequestId":"WOgAogpAMFwAAKxiB8oAAABD","wgIsProbablyEditable":true,"wgRestrictionEdit":[],"wgRestrictionMove":["sysop"],"wgFlaggedRevsParams":{"tags":{}},"wgStableRevisionId":null,"wgWikiEditorEnabledModules":{"toolbar":true,"dialogs":true,"preview":false,"publish":false},"wgBetaFeaturesFeatures":[],"wgMediaViewerOnClick":true,"wgMediaViewerEnabledByDefault":true,"wgPopupsShouldSendModuleToUser":false,"wgPopupsConflictsWithNavPopupGadget":false,"wgVisualEditor":{"pageLanguageCode":"en","pageLanguageDir":"ltr","usePageImages":true,"usePageDescriptions":true},"wgPreferredVariant":"en","wgMFDisplayWikibaseDescriptions":{"search":true,"nearby":true,"watchlist":true,"tagline":false},"wgRelatedArticles":null,"wgRelatedArticlesBetaFeatureEnabled":false,"wgRelatedArticlesUseCirrusSearch":true,"wgRelatedArticlesOnlyUseCirrusSearch":false,"wgULSCurrentAutonym":"English","wgNoticeProject":"wikipedia","wgCentralNoticeCookiesToDelete":[],"wgCentralNoticeCategoriesUsingLegacy":["Fundraising","fundraising"],"wgCategoryTreePageCategoryOptions":"{\"mode\":0,\"hideprefix\":20,\"showcount\":true,\"namespaces\":false}","wgCoordinates":{"lat":26,"lon":-80.7},"wgWikibaseItemId":"Q597281","wgCentralAuthMobileDomain":false,"wgVisualEditorToolbarScrollOffset":0,"wgEditSubmitButtonLabelPublish":false});mw.loader.state({"ext.globalCssJs.user.styles":"ready","ext.globalCssJs.site.styles":"ready","site.styles":"ready","noscript":"ready","user.styles":"ready","user":"ready","user.options":"loading","user.tokens":"loading","ext.cite.styles":"ready","wikibase.client.init":"ready","ext.visualEditor.desktopArticleTarget.noscript":"ready","ext.uls.interlanguage":"ready","ext.wikimediaBadges":"ready","mediawiki.legacy.shared":"ready","mediawiki.legacy.commonPrint":"ready","mediawiki.sectionAnchor":"ready","mediawiki.skinning.interface":"ready","skins.vector.styles":"ready","ext.globalCssJs.user":"ready","ext.globalCssJs.site":"ready"});mw.loader.implement("user.options@0j3lz3q",function($,jQuery,require,module){mw.user.options.set({"variant":"en"});});mw.loader.implement("user.tokens@1dqfd7l",function ( $, jQuery, require, module ) { mw.user.tokens.set({"editToken":"+\\","patrolToken":"+\\","watchToken":"+\\","csrfToken":"+\\"});/*@nomin*/; });mw.loader.load(["ext.cite.a11y","mediawiki.toc","mediawiki.action.view.postEdit","site","mediawiki.page.startup","mediawiki.user","mediawiki.hidpi","mediawiki.page.ready","mediawiki.legacy.wikibits","mediawiki.searchSuggest","ext.gadget.teahouse","ext.gadget.ReferenceTooltips","ext.gadget.watchlist-notice","ext.gadget.DRN-wizard","ext.gadget.charinsert","ext.gadget.refToolbar","ext.gadget.extra-toolbar-buttons","ext.gadget.switcher","ext.gadget.featured-articles-links","ext.centralauth.centralautologin","mmv.head","mmv.bootstrap.autostart","ext.visualEditor.desktopArticleTarget.init","ext.visualEditor.targetLoader","ext.eventLogging.subscriber","ext.wikimediaEvents","ext.navigationTiming","ext.uls.eventlogger","ext.uls.init","ext.uls.interface","ext.quicksurveys.init","ext.centralNotice.geoIP","ext.centralNotice.startUp","skins.vector.js"]);}); Everglades From Wikipedia, free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search For uses, see Everglades (disambiguation). Everglades Pa-hay-okee Natural region The primary feature Everglades sawgrass prairie. Southern third Florida Peninsula, showing area managed South Florida Water Management District, Lake Okeechobee, Everglades, Big Cypress National Preserve, Miami metropolitan area, Ten Thousand Islands, Florida Bay. Country United States State Florida The Everglades (or Pa-hay-okee) natural region tropical wetlands southern portion U.S. state Florida, comprising southern half large drainage basin part neotropic ecozone. The system begins near Orlando Kissimmee River, discharges vast shallow Lake Okeechobee. Water leaving lake wet season forms slow-moving river 60 miles (97km) wide 100 miles (160km) long, flowing southward across limestone shelf Florida Bay southern end state. The Everglades experience wide range weather patterns, frequent flooding wet season drought dry season. Writer Marjory Stoneman Douglas popularized term "River Grass" describe sawgrass marshes, part complex system interdependent ecosystems include cypress swamps, estuarine mangrove forests Ten Thousand Islands, tropical hardwood hammocks, pine rockland, marine environment Florida Bay. Human habitation southern portion Florida peninsula dates 15,000years ago. Before European colonization, region dominated native Calusa Tequesta tribes. With Spanish colonization, tribes declined gradually following two centuries. The Seminole formed mostly Creek people warring North; assimilated peoples created new culture. After forced northern Florida Everglades Seminole Wars early 19th century, adapted region able resist removal United States Army. Migrants region wanted develop plantations first proposed draining Everglades 1848, work type attempted 1882. Canals constructed throughout first half 20th century, spurred South Florida economy, prompting land development. In 1947, Congress formed Central Southern Florida Flood Control Project, built 1,400 miles (2,300km) canals, levees, water control devices. The Miami metropolitan area grew substantially time Everglades water diverted cities. Portions Everglades transformed farmland, primary crop sugarcane. Approximately 50percent original Everglades developed agricultural urban areas.[1] Following period rapid development environmental degradation, ecosystem began receive notable attention conservation groups 1970s. Internationally, UNESCO Ramsar Convention designated Everglades Wetland Area Global Importance. The construction large airport 6 miles (9.7km) north Everglades National Park blocked environmental study found severely damage South Florida ecosystem. With heightened awareness appreciation region, restoration began 1980s removal canal straightened Kissimmee River. However, development sustainability concerns remained pertinent region. The deterioration Everglades, including poor water quality Lake Okeechobee, linked diminishing quality life South Florida's urban areas. In 2000 Comprehensive Everglades Restoration Plan approved Congress combat problems. To date, expensive comprehensive environmental restoration attempt history, implementation faced political complications. Contents 1 Names 2 Geology 2.1 Limestone aquifers 2.2 Hydrology 3 Climate 4 Formative sustaining processes 4.1 Water 4.2 Rock 4.3 Fire 5 Ecosystems 5.1 Sawgrass marshes sloughs 5.2 Tropical hardwood hammock 5.3 Pineland 5.4 Cypress 5.5 Mangrove Coastal prairie 5.6 Florida Bay 6 History 6.1 Native Americans 6.1.1 Calusa Tequesta 6.1.2 Seminole 6.2 Exploration 6.3 Drainage 6.4 Growth urban areas 6.5 Flood control 6.5.1 Everglades National Park 6.5.2 Central Southern Florida Flood Control Project 6.5.3 Everglades Agricultural Area 6.5.4 Jetport proposition 7 Restoration 7.1 Kissimmee River 7.2 Water quality 7.3 Invasive species 7.4 Comprehensive Everglades Restoration Plan 7.5 Air crashes 7.6 Future Everglades 8 See also 9 Notes references 10 Bibliography 11 External links Names[edit] This map made U.S. military shows term "Everglades" 1857. The first written record Everglades Spanish maps made cartographers seen land. They named unknown area Gulf Atlantic coasts Florida Laguna del Espíritu Santo ("Lake Holy Spirit").[2] The area featured maps decades without explored. Writer John Grant Forbes stated 1811, "The Indians represent [the Southern points] impenetrable; [British] surveyors, wreckers, coasters, means exploring beyond borders sea coast, mouths rivers".[3] British surveyor John Gerard Brahm, mapped coast Florida 1773, called area "River Glades". Both Marjory Stoneman Douglas linguist Wallace McMullen suggest cartographers substituted "Ever" "River".[3][4] The name "Everglades" first appeared map 1823, although also spelled "Ever Glades" late 1851.[5] The Seminole call Pa-hay-okee, meaning "Grassy Water."[4] The region labeled "Pa-hai-okee" American military map 1839, although earlier called "Ever Glades" throughout Second Seminole War.[3] A 2007 survey geographers Ary J. Lamme Raymond K. Oldakowski found "Glades" emerged distinct vernacular region Florida. It comprises interior areas southernmost Gulf Coast South Florida, largely corresponding Everglades itself. It one sparsely populated areas state.[6] Geology[edit] The geology South Florida, together warm, wet, subtropical climate, provides conditions well-suited large marshland ecosystem. Layers porous permeable limestone create water-bearing rock soil affect climate, weather, hydrology South Florida.[7] The properties rock underneath Everglades explained geologic history state. The crust underneath Florida one point part African region supercontinent Gondwana. About 300 millionyears ago, North America merged Africa, connecting Florida North America. Volcanic activity centered eastern side Florida covered prevalent sedimentary rock igneous rock. Continental rifting began separate North America Gondwana 180 millionyears ago.[8] When Florida part Africa, initially water, cooler Jurassic Period, Florida Platform became shallow marine environment sedimentary rocks deposited. Through Cretaceous Period, Florida remained tropical sea floor varying depths.[9] The peninsula covered seawater least seven times since bedrock formed.[10] Limestone aquifers[edit] Fluctuating sea levels compressed numerous layers calcium carbonate, sand, shells. The resulting permeable limestone formations developed 25million 70million years ago created Floridan Aquifer, serves main source fresh water northern portion Florida. However, aquifer lies beneath thousands feet impermeable sedimentary rock Lake Okeechobee southern tip peninsula.[11] Limestone formations South Florida. Source: U.S. Geological Survey Five geologic formations make southern portion Florida: Tamiami Formation, Caloosahatchee Formation, Anastasia Formation, Miami Limestone (or Miami Oolite), Fort Thompson Formation. The Tamiami Formation compression highly permeable light colored fossiliferous sands pockets quartz, 150 feet (46m) thick. It named Tamiami Trail follows upper bedrock Big Cypress Swamp, underlies southern portion Everglades. Between Tamiami Formation Lake Okeechobee Caloosahatchee Formation, named river it. Much less permeable, formation highly calcitic composed sandy shell marl, clay, sand. Water underneath Caloosahatchee Formation typically mineralized. Both Tamiami Caloosahatchee Formations developed Pliocene Epoch.[12][13] Surrounding southern part Lake Okeechobee Fort Thompson Formation, made dense, hard limestone, shells, sand. Rain water less likely erode limestone form solution holes—smaller versions sinkholes intersect water table. In formation beds generally impermeable.[14] Underneath metropolitan areas Palm Beach County Anastasia Formation, composed shelly limestone, coquina, sand representing former mangrove salt marsh. The Anastasia Formation much permeable filled pocks solution holes.[14] The Fort Thompson Anastasia Formations, Miami Limestone (x), formed Sangamon interglacial period.[15] The geologic formations influence Everglades Miami Limestone Fort Thompson Formation. The Miami Limestone forms floor lower Everglades. The Miami Limestone made ooids: tiny formations egg-shaped concentric shells calcium carbonate, formed around single grain sand. The Miami Limestone formerly named Miami Oolite, comprises facies ooids fossilized bryozoan organisms.[16] The unique structure first material used housing early 20th-century South Florida. The composition sedimentary formation affects hydrology, plant life, wildlife it: rock especially porous stores water dry season Everglades, chemical composition determines vegetation prevalent region. The Miami Limestone also acts dam Fort Lauderdale Coot Bay.[17] The metropolitan areas Miami, Fort Lauderdale, West Palm Beach located rise elevation along eastern coast Florida, called Eastern Coastal Ridge, formed waves compressed ooids single formation. Along western border Big Cypress Swamp Immokolee Ridge (or Immokolee Rise), slight rise compressed sand divides runoff Caloosahatchee River The Big Cypress.[18] This slight rise elevation sides Everglades creates basin, forces water overflows Lake Okeechobee creep toward southwest.[19] Under Miami Limestone formation Fort Thompson limestone lies Biscayne Aquifer, surface aquifer serves Miami metropolitan area's fresh water source. Rainfall stored water Everglades replenish Biscayne Aquifer directly.[15] With rise sea levels occurred Pleistocene approximately 17,000years ago, runoff water Lake Okeechobee slowed created vast marshland known Everglades. Slower runoff also created accumulation almost 18 feet (5.5 m) peat area. The presence peat deposits, dated 5,000years ago, evidence widespread flooding occurred then.[20] Hydrology[edit] Predevelopment flow direction water Lake Okeechobee Florida Bay Source: U.S. Geological Survey The consistent Everglades flooding fed extensive Kissimmee, Caloosahatchee, Myakka, Peace Rivers central Florida. The Kissimmee River broad floodplain empties directly Lake Okeechobee, 730 square miles (1,900km2) average depth 9 feet (2.7m), vast shallow lake.[21] Soil deposits Everglades basin indicate peat deposited land flooded consistently throughout year. Calcium deposits left behind flooding shorter. The deposits occur areas water rises falls depending rainfall, opposed water stored rock one year next. Calcium deposits present limestone exposed.[22] The area Orlando tip Florida peninsula one point single drainage unit. When rainfall exceeded capacity Lake Okeechobee Kissimmee River floodplain, spilled flowed southwestern direction empty Florida Bay. Prior urban agricultural development Florida, Everglades began southern edge Lake Okeechobee flowed approximately 100 miles (160km), emptying Gulf Mexico. The limestone shelf wide slightly angled instead narrow, deep channel characteristic rivers. The vertical gradient Lake Okeechobee Florida Bay 2 inches (5.1cm) per mile, creating almost 60-mile (97km) wide expanse river travels half mile (0.8km) day.[23] This slow movement broad, shallow river known sheetflow, gives Everglades nickname, River Grass. Water leaving Lake Okeechobee may require months years reach final destination, Florida Bay. The sheetflow travels slowly water typically stored one wet season next porous limestone substrate. The ebb flow water shaped land every ecosystem South Florida throughout Everglades' estimated 5,000years existence. The motion water defines plant communities animals adapt habitats food sources.[24] Climate[edit] Hurricane Charley 2004 moving ashore South Florida's Gulf Mexico coast The climate South Florida located across broad transition zone subtropical tropical climates (Koppen Cf Aw). Like regions climate type, two basic seasons – "dry season" (winter) runs November April, "wet season" (summer) runs May October. About 70% annual rainfall south Florida occurs wet season – often brief intense tropical downpours. The dry season sees little rainfall dew points humidity often quite low. The dry season severe times, wildfires water restrictions often place. The annual range temperatures south Florida Everglades rather small (less 20°F [11°C]) – ranging monthly mean temperature around 65°F (18°C) January 83°F (28°C) July. High temperatures hot wet season (summer) typically exceed 90°F (32°C) across inland south Florida (although coastal locations cooled winds Gulf Mexico Atlantic Ocean), high temperatures dry winter season average 70 79°F (21 26°C). Frost freeze rare across south Florida Everglades; annually coastal cities like Miami Naples report zero days frost, although times decade temperatures may fall 30 40°F (−1 4°C) across South Florida. Annual rainfall averages approximately 62 inches (160cm), Eastern Coastal Ridge receiving majority precipitation area surrounding Lake Okeechobee receiving 48 inches (120cm).[25] Unlike wetland system earth, Everglades sustained primarily atmosphere.[26] Evapotranspiration – sum evaporation plant transpiration Earth's land surface atmosphere – associated thunderstorms, key mechanism water leaves region. During year unaffected drought, rate may reach 40 inches (100cm) year. When droughts take place, rate may peak 50 inches (130cm), exceed amount rainfall.[27] As water leaves area evaporation groundwater plant matter, activated primarily solar energy, moved wind patterns areas border flow Everglades watershed system. Evapotranspiration responsible approximately 70–90percent water entering undeveloped wetland regions Everglades.[28] Precipitation wet season primarily caused air mass thunderstorms easterly flow subtropical high (Bermuda High). Intense daytime heating ground causes warm moist tropical air rise, creating afternoon thundershowers typical tropical climates. 2:00pm mean time daily thundershowers across South Florida Everglades. Late wet season (August September), precipitation levels reach highest levels tropical depressions lows add daily rainfall. Occasionally, tropical lows become severe tropical cyclones significant damage make landfall across south Florida. Tropical storms average one year, major hurricanes every ten years. Between 1871 1981, 138tropical cyclones struck directly close Everglades.[25] Strong winds storms disperse plant seeds replenish mangrove forests, coral reefs, ecosystems. Dramatic fluctuations precipitation characteristic South Florida climate. Droughts, floods, tropical cyclones part natural water system Everglades.[28] Average, maximum, minimum levels rainfall lower east coast Florida, 1918 1985[25] Period Mean Maximum Minimum Annual 51.9 inches (132cm) 77.5 inches (197cm) 36.7 inches (93cm) Wet season 34.5 inches (88cm) 53.5 inches (136cm) 23.4 inches (59cm) Dry season 17.4 inches (44cm) 30.9 inches (78cm) 7.3 inches (19cm) Formative sustaining processes[edit] Main article: Geography ecology Everglades The Everglades complex system interdependent ecosystems. Marjory Stoneman Douglas described area "River Grass" 1947, though metaphor represents portion system. The area recognized Everglades, prior drainage, web marshes prairies 4,000 square miles (10,000km2) size.[29] Borders ecosystems subtle imperceptible. These systems shift, grow shrink, die, reappear within years decades. Geologic factors, climate, frequency fire help create, maintain, replace ecosystems Everglades. Water[edit] A storm Shark River Everglades, 1966 Photo:Charles Barron / State Library Archives Florida Water dominant force Everglades, shaping land, vegetation, animal life South Florida. Starting last glacial maximum, 21,000 years ago, continental ice sheets retreated sea levels rose. This submerged portions Florida peninsula caused water table rise. Fresh water saturated limestone underlies Everglades, eroding away, created springs sinkholes. The abundance fresh water allowed new vegetation take root, formed convective thunderstorms land evaporation.[30][31] As rain continued fall, slightly acidic rainwater dissolved limestone. As limestone wore away, groundwater came contact land surface created massive wetland ecosystem.[30] Although region appears flat, weathering limestone created slight valleys plateaus areas. These plateaus rise fall inches, subtle South Florida topography small variations affect flow water types vegetation take hold.[32] Rock[edit] Uneven limestone formations Everglades sawgrass prairie The underlying bedrock limestone Everglades basin affects hydroperiod, long area within region stays flooded throughout year.[30] Longer hydroperiods possible areas submerged beneath seawater longer periods time, geology Florida forming. More water held within porous ooids limestone older types rock spent time sea level.[33] A hydroperiod ten months fosters growth sawgrass, whereas shorter hydroperiod six months less promotes beds periphyton, growth algae microscopic organisms. There two types soil Everglades, peat marl. Where longer hydroperiods, peat builds hundreds thousands years due many generations decaying plant matter.[34] Where periphyton grows, soil develops marl, calcitic composition. Initial attempts developing agriculture near Lake Okeechobee successful, nutrients peat rapidly removed. In process called soil subsidence, oxidation peat causes loss volume.[35] Bacteria decompose dead sawgrass slowly underwater without oxygen. When water drained 1920s bacteria interacted oxygen, aerobic reaction occurred. Microorganisms degraded peat carbon dioxide water. Some peat burned settlers clear land. Some homes built areas early farms foundations moved stilts peat deteriorated; areas lost approximately 8 feet (2.4m) soil depth.[36] Fire[edit] Fire important element natural maintenance Everglades. The majority fires caused lightning strikes thunderstorms wet season. Their effects largely superficial, serve foster specific plant growth: sawgrass burn water, roots preserved underneath. Fire sawgrass marshes serves keep larger bushes trees, releases nutrients decaying plant matter efficiently decomposition.[37] Whereas wet season, dead plant matter tips grasses trees burned, dry season fire may fed organic peat burn deeply, destroying root systems.[37] Fires confined existing water rainfall. It takes approximately 225years one foot (.30 m) peat develop, locations peat less dense 5,000years Everglades' existence.[38] Scientists indicate fire cause; also cited reason black color Everglades muck. Layers charcoal detected peat portions Everglades indicate region endured severe fires years time, although trend seems abated since last occurrence 940 BCE.[38] Ecosystems[edit] Main article: Geography ecology Everglades Major landscape types Everglades human action. Source: U.S. Geological Survey Sawgrass marshes sloughs[edit] Several ecosystems present Everglades, boundaries subtle absent. The primary feature Everglades sawgrass marsh. The iconic water sawgrass combination shallow river 100 miles (160km) long 60 miles (97km) wide spans Lake Okeechobee Florida Bay often referred "true Everglades" "the Glades".[39][40] Prior first drainage attempts 1905, sheetflow occupied nearly third lower Florida peninsula.[30] Sawgrass thrives slowly moving water, may die unusually deep floods oxygen unable reach roots. It particularly vulnerable immediately fire.[41] The hydroperiod marsh least nine months, last longer.[42] Where sawgrass grows densely, animals plants live, although alligators choose locations nesting. Where room, periphyton grows.[43] Periphyton supports larval insects amphibians, turn consumed food birds, fish, reptiles. It also absorbs calcium water, adds calcitic composition marl.[44] Sloughs, free-flowing channels water, develop sawgrass prairies. Sloughs 3 feet (0.91m) deeper sawgrass marshes, may stay flooded least 11months year sometimes multiple years row.[45] Aquatic animals turtles, alligators, snakes, fish thrive sloughs; usually feed aquatic invertebrates.[46] Submerged floating plants grow here, bladderwort (Utricularia), waterlily (Nymphaeaceae), spatterdock (Nuphar lutea). Major sloughs Everglades system include Shark River Slough flowing Florida Bay, Lostmans River Slough bordering The Big Cypress, Taylor Slough eastern Everglades. Wet prairies slightly elevated like sawgrass marshes, greater plant diversity. The surface covered water three seven months year, water is, average, shallow 4 inches (10cm) deep.[47] When flooded, marl support variety water plants.[48] Solution holes, deep pits limestone worn away, may remain flooded even prairies dry, support aquatic invertebrates crayfish snails, larval amphibians feed young wading birds.[49] These regions tend border sloughs sawgrass marshes. Alligators created niche wet prairies. With claws snouts dig spots create ponds free vegetation remain submerged throughout dry season. Alligator holes integral survival aquatic invertebrates, turtles, fish, small mammals, birds extended drought periods. The alligators feed upon animals come hole.[50][51] Tropical hardwood hammock[edit] In tropical hardwood hammock, trees dense diverse. Main article: Tropical hardwood hammock Small islands trees growing land raised 1 foot (0.30m) 3 feet (0.91m) sloughs prairies called tropical hardwood hammocks.[52] They may range one (4,000m²) ten acres (40,000m²) area, appear freshwater sloughs, sawgrass prairies, pineland. Hammocks slightly elevated limestone plateaus risen several inches surrounding peat, may grow land unharmed deep peat fires. Hardwood hammocks exhibit mixture subtropical hardwood trees, Southern live oak (Quercus virginiana), gumbo limbo (Bursera simaruba), royal palm (Roystonea), bustic (Dipholis salicifolia) grow dense clumps.[53] Near base, sharp saw palmettos (Serenoa repens) flourish, making hammocks difficult people penetrate, though small mammals, reptiles amphibians find islands ideal habitat. Water sloughs flows around islands, creating moats. Though ecosystems maintained promoted fire, hammocks may take decades centuries recover. The moats around hammocks protect trees.[54] The trees limited height weather factors frost, lightning, wind; majority trees hammocks grow higher 55 feet (17m). Pineland[edit] Some driest land Everglades pineland (also called pine rockland) ecosystem, located highest part Everglades little hydroperiod. Some floors, however, may flooded solution holes puddles months time. The significant feature pineland single species South Florida slash pine (Pinus elliottii). Pineland communities require fire maintain them, trees several adaptations simultaneously promote resist fire.[55] The sandy floor pine forest covered dry pine needles highly flammable. South Florida slash pines insulated bark protect heat. Fire eliminates competing vegetation forest floor, opens pine cones germinate seeds.[56] A period without significant fire turn pineland hardwood hammock larger trees overtake slash pines.[57] The understory shrubs pine rocklands fire-resistant saw palmetto (Serenoa repens), cabbage palm (Sabal palmetto), West Indian lilac (Tetrazygia bicolor). The diverse group plants pine community herbs, two dozen species. These plants contain tubers mechanisms allow sprout quickly charred.[58] Prior urban development South Florida region, pine rocklands covered approximately 161,660 acres (654.2km2) Miami-Dade County. Within Everglades National Park, 19,840 acres (80.3km2) pine forests protected, outside park, 1,780 acres (7.2km2) pine communities remained 1990, averaging 12.1 acres (49,000m2) area.[55] The misunderstanding role fire also played part disappearance pine forests area, natural fires put pine rocklands transitioned hardwood hammocks. Prescribed fires occur Everglades National Park pine rocklands every three seven years.[59] A cross section fresh water ecosystems Everglades, relative average water depths Cypress[edit] A pond The Big Cypress Cypress swamps found throughout Everglades, largest covers Collier County. The Big Cypress Swamp located west sawgrass prairies sloughs, commonly called "The Big Cypress."[60] The name refers area rather height diameter trees; conservative estimate, swamp measures 1,200 square miles (3,100km2), hydrologic boundary The Big Cypress calculated 2,400 square miles (6,200km2).[61] Most The Big Cypress sits atop bedrock covered thinner layer limestone. The limestone underneath Big Cypress contains quartz, creates sandy soil hosts variety vegetation different found areas Everglades.[60] The basin The Big Cypress receives average 55 inches (140cm) water wet season.[62] Though The Big Cypress largest growth cypress swamps South Florida, cypress swamps found near Atlantic Coastal Ridge Lake Okeechobee Eastern flatwoods, well sawgrass marshes. Cypresses deciduous conifers uniquely adapted thrive flooded conditions, buttressed trunks root projections protrude water, called "knees".[63] Bald cypress trees grow formations tallest thickest trunks center, rooted deepest peat. As peat thins out, cypresses grow smaller thinner, giving small forest appearance dome outside.[64] They also grow strands, slightly elevated ridge limestone bordered either side sloughs.[65] Other hardwood trees found cypress domes, red maple, swamp bay, pop ash. If cypresses removed, hardwoods take over, ecosystem recategorized mixed swamp forest. Mangrove Coastal prairie[edit] Red mangrove trees bordering tidal estuary Everglades Eventually water Lake Okeechobee The Big Cypress makes way ocean. Mangrove trees well adapted transitional zone brackish water fresh salt water meet.[66] The estuarine ecosystem Ten Thousand Islands, comprised almost completely mangrove forests, covers almost 200,000 acres (810km2).[67] In wet season fresh water pours Florida Bay, sawgrass begins grow closer coastline. In dry season, particularly extended periods drought, salt water creeps inland coastal prairie, ecosystem buffers freshwater marshes absorbing sea water. Mangrove trees begin grow fresh water ecosystems salt water goes far enough inland.[68] There three species trees considered mangroves: red (Rhizophora mangle), black (Avicennia germinans), white (Laguncularia racemosa), although different families.[69] All grow oxygen-poor soil, survive drastic water level changes, tolerant salt, brackish, fresh water.[70] All three mangrove species integral coastline protection severe storms. Red mangroves farthest-reaching roots, trapping sediments help build coastlines storms. All three types trees absorb energy waves storm surges. Everglades mangroves also serve nurseries crustaceans fish, rookeries birds. The region supports Tortugas pink shrimp (Farfantepenaeus duorarum) stone crab (Menippe mercenaria) industries;[71] 80 90 percent commercially harvested crustacean species Florida's salt waters born spend time near Everglades.[67][72] Florida Bay[edit] Main article: Florida Bay A clump mangroves distance, Florida Bay Flamingo Much coast inner estuaries built mangroves; border coastal marshes bay. Thus marine ecosystems Florida Bay considered part Everglades watershed one ecosystems connected affected Everglades whole. More 800 square miles (2,100km2) Florida Bay protected Everglades National Park, representing largest body water park boundaries.[73] There approximately 100 keys Florida Bay, many mangrove forests.[74] The fresh water coming Florida Bay Everglades creates perfect conditions vast beds turtle grass algae formations foundation animal life bay. Sea turtles manatees eat grass, invertebrate animals, worms, clams mollusks eat algae formations microscopic plankton.[75] Female sea turtles return annually nest shore, manatees spend winter months warmer water bay. Sea grasses also serve stabilize sea beds protect shorelines erosion absorbing energy waves. History[edit] Native Americans[edit] Main article: Indigenous people Everglades region Humans arrived Florida peninsula approximately 15,000years ago. Paleo-Indians came Florida probably following large game included giant sloths, saber-toothed cats, spectacled bears. They found arid landscape supported plants animals adapted desert conditions.[76] However, 6,500years ago, climate changes brought wetter landscape; large animals became extinct Florida, Paleo-Indians slowly adapted became Archaic peoples. They conformed environmental changes, created many tools various resources available.[77] During Late Archaic period, climate became wetter again, approximately 3000 BCE rise water tables allowed increase population cultural activity. Florida Indians developed three distinct similar cultures named bodies water near located: Okeechobee, Caloosahatchee, Glades.[78] Calusa Tequesta[edit] Main articles: Calusa Tequesta From Glades peoples, two major nations emerged area: Calusa Tequesta. The Calusa largest powerful nation South Florida. It controlled fifty villages located Florida's west coast, around Lake Okeechobee, Florida Keys. Most Calusa villages located mouths rivers key islands. The Calusa hunter-gatherers lived small game, fish, turtles, alligators, shellfish, various plants.[79] Most tools made bone teeth, although sharpened reeds also effective hunting war. Calusa weapons consisted bows arrows, atlatls, spears. Canoes used transportation, South Florida tribes often canoed Everglades, rarely lived them.[80] Canoe trips Cuba also common.[81] Estimated numbers Calusa beginning Spanish occupation ranged 4,000 7,000.[82] The society declined power population; 1697 number estimated 1,000.[81] In early 18th century, Calusa came attack Yamasee north. They asked Spanish refuge Cuba, almost 200 died illness. Soon relocated Florida Keys.[83] Second power number Calusa South Florida Tequesta. They occupied southeastern portion lower peninsula modern-day Dade Broward counties. Like Calusa, Tequesta societies centered mouths rivers. Their main village probably Miami River Little River. Spanish depictions Tequesta state greatly feared sailors, suspected torturing killing survivors shipwrecks.[84] With increasing European presence south Florida, Native Americans Keys areas began increasing trips Cuba. Official permission immigration Native Americans Florida Keys granted Cuban officials 1704.[85] Spanish priests attempted set missions 1743, noted Tequesta assault neighboring tribe. When 30members left, removed Havana. A British surveyor 1770 described multiple deserted villages region Tequesta lived.[86] Common descriptions Native Americans Florida 1820 used term "Seminoles".[87] Seminole[edit] Main article: Seminole Seminoles made home Everglades Following demise Calusa Tequesta, Native Americans southern Florida referred "Spanish Indians" 1740s, probably due friendlier relations Spain. The Creek invaded Florida peninsula; conquered assimilated left pre-Columbian societies Creek Confederacy. They joined remnant Indian groups formed Seminole, new tribe, ethnogenesis. The Seminole originally settled northern portion territory. In addition, free blacks fugitive slaves made way Florida, Spain promised slaves freedom arms converted Catholicism pledged loyalty Spain. These African Americans gradually created communities near Seminole, became known Black Seminoles. The groups acted allies. In 1817, Andrew Jackson invaded Florida hasten annexation United States, became known First Seminole War. After Florida became U.S. territory 1821, conflicts settlers Seminole increased former tried acquire lands. The Second Seminole War lasted 1835 1842, afterward, US forcibly removed 3,000 Seminole 800 Black Seminole Indian Territory (now Oklahoma), west Mississippi River. Many others died war.[88] Conflict broke Third Seminole War 1855 1859, hundred Seminole fought US forces swamps Everglades. The US finally decided leave alone, dislodge even protracted expensive warfare. By 1913, Seminole Everglades numbered 325.[89] They made living hunting trading white settlers, raised domesticated animals.[90] The Seminole made villages hardwood hammocks pinelands, diets hominy coontie roots, fish, turtles, venison, small game.[89] Their villages large, due limited size hammocks. Between end last Seminole War 1930, people lived relative isolation majority culture. The construction Tamiami Trail, beginning 1928 spanning region Tampa Miami, altered ways life. Some began work local farms, ranches, souvenir stands.[91] Some people interacted European Americans began move reservations 1940s. These bases reorganizing government became federally recognized 1957 Seminole Tribe Florida. People kept traditional ways settlements along Tamiami Trail tended speak Mikasuki language. They later federally recognized 1962 Miccosukee Tribe Indians Florida. As metropolitan areas South Florida began grow, two groups closely associated Everglades. They struggled maintain privacy serving tourist attractions. They earned money wrestling alligators selling craftworks.[92] As 2008, Seminole Tribe Florida five reservations, lands Miccosukee Tribe Indians collectively considered sixth reservation. The two tribes developed casino gaming properties generate revenue support, services economic development.[93] Exploration[edit] Map Everglades 1856: Military action Seminole Wars improved understanding features Everglades Main article: Draining development Everglades The military penetration southern Florida offered opportunity map poorly understood largely unknown part country. An 1840 expedition Everglades offered first printed account general public read Everglades. The anonymous writer described terrain party crossing: "No country I ever heard bears resemblance it; seems like vast sea filled grass green trees, expressly intended retreat rascally Indian, white man never seek drive them".[94] The land seemed inspire extreme reactions wonder hatred. During Second Seminole War army surgeon wrote, "It fact hideous region live in, perfect paradise Indians, alligators, serpents, frogs, every kind loathsome reptile."[95] In 1897, explorer Hugh Willoughby spent eight days canoeing party mouth Harney River Miami River. He sent observations New Orleans Times-Democrat. Willoughby described water healthy wholesome, numerous springs, 10,000alligators "more less" Lake Okeechobee. The party encountered thousands birds near Shark River, "killing hundreds, continued return".[96] Willoughby pointed much rest country explored mapped except part Florida, writing, "(w)e tract land one hundred thirty miles long seventy miles wide much unknown white man heart Africa."[97] Drainage[edit] A national push expansion progress United States occurred later part 19th century, stimulated interest draining Everglades agricultural use. According historians, "From middle nineteenth century middle twentieth century, United States went period wetland removal questioned. Indeed, considered proper thing do."[98] Draining Everglades suggested early 1837,[5] resolution Congress passed 1842 prompted Secretary Treasury Robert J. Walker request experience Everglades give opinion possibility drainage. Many officers served Seminole Wars favored idea.[5] In 1850 Congress passed law gave several states wetlands within state boundaries. The Swamp Overflowed Lands Act ensured state responsible funding attempts developing wetlands farmlands.[99] Florida quickly formed committee consolidate grants pay attempts, though Civil War Reconstruction halted progress 1877. Hamilton Disston's land sale notice After Civil War, state agency called Internal Improvement Fund (IIF), whose purpose improve Florida's roads, canals, rail lines, discovered deeply debt. The IIF found Pennsylvania real estate developer named Hamilton Disston interested implementing plans drain land agriculture. Disston purchased 4,000,000 acres (16,000km2) land $1 million 1881,[100] began constructing canals near St. Cloud. At first canals seemed work lowering water levels wetlands surrounding rivers.[101] They effective lowering groundwater, became apparent capacity insufficient wet season.[102] Though Disston's canals drain well, purchase primed economy Florida. It made news attracted tourists land buyers. Within four years property values doubled, population increased significantly.[100] The IIF able invest development projects due Disston's purchase, opportunity improve transportation arose oil tycoon Henry Flagler began purchasing land building rail lines along east coast Florida, far south Palm Beach 1893.[103] Along way built resort hotels, transforming territorial outposts tourist destinations. The land bordering rail lines developed citrus farms.[104] By 1896 rail line extended Biscayne Bay.[105] Three months first train arrived, residents Miami voted incorporate town. Miami became prime destination extremely wealthy people Royal Palm Hotel opened.[106] During 1904 gubernatorial race, strongest candidate, Napoleon Bonaparte Broward, promoted draining Everglades. He called future South Florida "Empire Everglades". Soon successful election, began work "drain abominable pestilence-ridden swamp",[107] pushed Florida legislature form group commissioners oversee reclamation flooded lands. In 1907 established Everglades Drainage District began study build effective canals, fund them.[5] Governor Broward ran U.S. Senate 1908 lost. Broward paid land developer Richard J. Bolles tour state promote drainage. Elected Senate 1910, Broward died take office. Land Everglades sold $15 acre month Broward died.[108] Meanwhile, Henry Flagler continued build railway stations towns soon populations warranted them.[105] Growth urban areas[edit] A canal lock Everglades Drainage District around 1915 With construction canals, newly reclaimed Everglades land promoted throughout United States. Land developers sold 20,000lots months 1912. Advertisements promised within eight weeks arrival, farmer making living, although many took least two months clear land. Some tried burning sawgrass vegetation, learn peat continued burn. Animals tractors used plowing got mired muck useless. When muck dried, turned fine black powder created dust storms.[109] Though initially crops sprouted quickly lushly, quickly wilted died, seemingly without reason.[110] The increasing population towns near Everglades hunted area. Raccoons otters widely hunted skins. Hunting often went unchecked; one trip, Lake Okeechobee hunter killed 250alligators 172otters.[111] Water birds particular target plume hunting. Bird feathers used women's hats late 19th early 20th centuries. In 1886, 5million birds estimated killed feathers.[112] They shot usually spring, feathers colored mating nesting. The plumes, aigrettes, called millinery business, sold $32 ounce 1915— price gold.[111] Millinery $17million year industry[113] motivated plume harvesters lay watch nests egrets many colored birds nesting season, shoot parents small-bore rifles, leave chicks starve.[111] Plumes Everglades wading birds found Havana, New York City, London, Paris. Hunters collect plumes hundred birds good day.[114] Rum-runners used Everglades hiding spot Prohibition; vast never enough law enforcement officers patrol it.[115] The arrival railroad, discovery adding trace elements like copper remedy crops sprouting dying quickly, soon created population boom. New towns Moore Haven, Clewiston, Belle Glade sprouted like crops.[5] Sugarcane became primary crop grown South Florida. Miami experienced second real estate boom earned developer Coral Gables $150million. Undeveloped land north Miami sold $30,600 acre.[116] In 1925, Miami newspapers published editions weighing 7 pounds (3.2kg), real estate advertising.[117] Waterfront property highly valued. Mangrove trees cut replaced palm trees improve view. Acres South Florida slash pine cleared. Some pine lumber, pine forests Dade County cleared development.[55] Flood control[edit] A sign advertising completion Herbert Hoover Dike Two catastrophic hurricanes 1926 1928 caused Lake Okeechobee breach levees, killing thousands people. The government began focus control floods rather drainage. The Okeechobee Flood Control District created 1929, financed state federal funds. President Herbert Hoover toured towns affected 1928 Okeechobee Hurricane ordered Army Corps Engineers assist communities surrounding lake.[118] Between 1930 1937 dike 66 miles (106km) long built around southern edge lake. Control Hoover Dike waters Lake Okeechobee delegated federal powers: United States declared legal limits lake 14 17 feet (4.3 5.2m).[97] A massive canal also constructed 80 feet (24m) wide 6 feet (1.8m) deep Caloosahatchee River; whenever lake rose high, excess water left canal.[97] More $20million spent entire project. Sugarcane production soared dike canal built. The populations small towns surrounding lake jumped 3,000 9,000 World War II.[119] Immediately effects Hoover Dike seen. An extended drought occurred 1930s; wall preventing water leaving Lake Okeechobee canals ditches removing water, Everglades became parched. Peat turned dust. Salt ocean water intruded Miami's wells; city brought expert explain why, discovered water Everglades area's groundwater—here, appeared surface.[120] In 1939, million acres (4,000km²) Everglades burned, black clouds peat sawgrass fires hung Miami.[121] Scientists took soil samples draining take account organic composition peat muck Everglades make prone soil subsidence becomes dry. Naturally occurring bacteria Everglades peat muck assist process decomposition water, generally slow, partially due levels dissolved oxygen. When water levels became peat muck surface, bacteria interacted much higher levels oxygen air, rapidly breaking soil. In places, homes moved stilts 8 feet (2.4m) soil lost.[36] Everglades National Park[edit] President Harry Truman dedicating Everglades National Park December 6, 1947. Main article: Everglades National Park The idea national park Everglades pitched 1928, Miami land developer named Ernest F. Coe established Everglades Tropical National Park Association. It enough support declared national park Congress 1934. It took another 13years dedicated December 6, 1947.[122] One month dedication park, former editor The Miami Herald freelance writer named Marjory Stoneman Douglas released first book titled The Everglades: River Grass. After researching region five years, described history ecology South Florida great detail. She characterized Everglades river instead stagnant swamp.[123] The last chapter titled, "The Eleventh Hour" warned Everglades dying, although reversed.[124] Central Southern Florida Flood Control Project[edit] The year park dedicated, two hurricanes wet season caused 100 inches (250cm) fall South Florida. Though human casualties, agricultural interests lost approximately $59million.[125] In 1948 Congress approved Central Southern Florida Project Flood Control Other Purposes (CSF), divided Everglades basins. In northern Everglades Water Conservation Areas (WCAs), Everglades Agricultural Area (EAA) bordering south Lake Okeechobee. In southern Everglades Everglades National Park. Levees pumping stations bordered WCA, released water dryer times removed pumped ocean times flood. The WCAs took approximately 37percent original Everglades.[126] The CSF constructed 1,000 miles (1,600km) canals, hundreds pumping stations levees within three decades. During 1950s 1960s Miami metropolitan area grew four times fast rest nation. Between 1940 1965, 6million people moved South Florida: 1,000people moved Miami every week.[127] Developed areas mid-1950s late 1960s quadrupled. Much water reclaimed Everglades sent newly developed areas.[128] Everglades Agricultural Area[edit] See also: Draining_and_development_of_the_Everglades §Everglades_Agricultural_Area A 2003 U.S. Geological Survey photo showing border Water Conservation Area 3 (bottom) water, Everglades National Park, dry (top) The CSF established 470,000 acres (1,900km2) Everglades Agricultural Area—27percent Everglades prior development.[129] In late 1920s, agricultural experiments indicated adding large amounts manganese sulfate Everglades muck produced profitable harvest vegetables.[130] The primary cash crop EAA sugarcane, though sod, beans, lettuce, celery, rice also grown. Fields EAA typically 40 acres (160,000m2), bordered canals two sides, connected larger canals water pumped depending needs crops.[131] The fertilizers used vegetables, along high concentrations nitrogen phosphorus byproduct decayed soil necessary sugarcane production, pumped WCAs south EAA. The introduction large amounts chemicals provided opportunities exotic plants take hold Everglades.[132] One defining characteristics natural Everglades ecology ability support nutrient-poor environment, introduction fertilizers began alter plant life region.[133] Jetport proposition[edit] A turning point came development Everglades proposition expanded airport Miami International Airport outgrew capacities. The new jetport planned larger O'Hare, Dulles, JFK, LAX airports combined, chosen location 6 miles (9.7km) north Everglades National Park. The first sentence U.S. Department Interior study environmental impact jetport read, "Development proposed jetport attendant facilities... inexorably destroy south Florida ecosystem thus Everglades National Park".[134] When studies indicated proposed jetport create 4,000,000 US gallons (15,000,000L) raw sewage day 10,000 short tons (9,100t) jet engine pollutants year, project met staunch opposition. The New York Times called "blueprint disaster",[135] Wisconsin senator Gaylord Nelson wrote President Richard Nixon voicing opposition: "It test whether really committed country protecting environment."[136] Governor Claude Kirk withdrew support project, Marjory Stoneman Douglas persuaded 79years old go tour give hundreds speeches it. Nixon instead established Big Cypress National Preserve, announcing Special Message Congress Outlining 1972 Environmental Program .[137] Restoration[edit] Main article: Restoration Everglades Kissimmee River[edit] The Central Southern Florida Flood Control Project's final construction project straightening Kissimmee River, meandering 90-mile (140km)-long river drained make way grazing land agriculture. The CSF started building C-38 canal 1962 effects seen almost immediately. Waterfowl, wading birds, fish disappeared, prompting conservationists sport fishers demand region restored canal finished 1971.[138] In general, CSF projects criticized temporary fixes ignored future consequences, costing billions dollars end sight.[139] After Governor Bob Graham initiated Save Our Everglades campaign 1983, first section canal backfilled 1986. Graham announced 2000 Everglades restored closely possible pre-drainage state.[140] The Kissimmee River Restoration project approved Congress 1992. It estimated cost $578million convert 22 miles (35km) canal. The entire project complete 2011,[141] yet 2017, project "more halfway complete" new completion date 2020. [142] Water quality[edit] Warnings placed Everglades National Park dissuade people eating fish due high mercury content. Further problems environment arose vast algal bloom appeared one-fifth Lake Okeechobee 1986. The year cattails discovered overtaking sawgrass marshes Loxahatchee National Wildlife Refuge. Scientists discovered phosphorus, used fertilizer EAA, flushed canals pumped back lake.[143] When lake drained, phosphorus entered water marshes, changing nutrient levels. It kept periphyton forming marl, one two soils Everglades. The arrival phosphorus allowed cattails spread quickly. The cattails grew dense mats—too thick birds alligators nest in. It also dissolved oxygen peat, promoted algae, prohibited growth native invertebrates bottom food chain.[144] At time mercury found local fish high levels consumption warnings posted fishermen. A Florida panther found dead levels mercury high enough kill human.[145] Scientists found power plants incinerators using fossil fuels expelling mercury atmosphere, fell rain dust droughts. The naturally occurring bacteria reduce sulfur Everglades ecosystem transforming mercury methylmercury, bioaccumulating food chain.[145] Stricter emissions standards helped lower mercury coming power plants incinerators, turn lowered mercury levels found animals, though continue concern.[145] The Everglades Forever Act, introduced Governor Lawton Chiles 1994, attempt legislate lowering phosphorus Everglades waterways. The act put South Florida Water Management District (SFWMD) Florida Department Environmental Protection (DEP) charge testing enforcing phosphorus levels: 10parts per billion (ppb) (down 500ppb 1980s).[146] The SFWMD built Stormwater Treatment Areas (STAs) near sugarcane fields water leaving EAA flows ponds lined lime rock layers peat calcareous periphyton. Testing shown method effective previously anticipated, bringing levels 80ppb 10ppb.[147] Invasive species[edit] Main article: List invasive species Everglades Climbing ferns overtake cypress trees Everglades. The ferns act "fire ladders" destroy trees otherwise survive fires. As center trade travel U.S., Caribbean, South America, South Florida especially vulnerable invasive species, species plants animals adapt aggressively conditions Everglades, allowing reproduce faster grow larger naturally native environments. Approximately 26% species fish, reptiles, birds, mammals South Florida exotic—more part U.S.—and region hosts one highest numbers exotic plant species world.[148] Controlling invasive species 1,700,000 acres (6,900km2) infested land South Florida costs authorities $500 million year.[149] The Everglades hosts 1,392 exotic plant species actively reproducing region, outnumbering 1,301 species considered native South Florida.[150] The melaleuca tree (Melaleuca quinquenervia) takes water greater amounts trees. Melaleucas grow taller densely Everglades native Australia, making unsuitable nesting areas birds wide wingspans.[151] They also choke native vegetation. More $2million spent keeping Everglades National Park.[152] Brazilian pepper, Florida holly (Schinus terebinthifolius), also wreaked havoc Everglades, exhibiting tendency spread rapidly crowd native species plants well create inhospitable environments native animals. It especially difficult eradicate readily propagated birds, eat small red berries.[153] The Brazilian pepper problem exclusive Everglades; neither water hyacinth (Eichhornia crassipes), widespread problem Florida's waterways, major threat endemic species, difficult costly eradicate. The Old World climbing fern (Lygodium microphyllum) may causing harm restoration blankets areas thickly, making impossible animals pass through. It also climbs trees creates "fire ladders", allowing parts trees burn otherwise remain unharmed.[154] Many pets escaped released Everglades surrounding urban areas. Some find conditions quite favorable established self-sustaining populations, competing food space native animals. Many tropical fish released, blue tilapias (Oreochromis aureus) damage shallow waterways creating large nests consuming aquatic plants protect native young fish.[155] Native southern Asia, Burmese python (Python molurus bivittatus) relatively new invasive species Everglades. This species grow 20 feet (6.1m) long, compete alligators top food chain. Florida wildlife officials speculate escaped pythons begun reproducing environment well-suited.[156][157] In Everglades National Park alone, agents removed 2,000 Burmese pythons park 2017 [158]. Federal authorities banned four species exotic snakes, including Burmese python, 2012.[159] The pythons believed responsible drastic decreases populations mammals within park.[160] The invasive species causes damage bird populations cat (Felis catus), domestic feral. Cats let outside live close suburban populations estimated number 640per square mile. In close numbers historic migratory areas, devastating effects migratory bird populations.[161] Comprehensive Everglades Restoration Plan[edit] Main article: Comprehensive Everglades Restoration Plan Though scientists made headway decreasing mercury phosphorus levels water, natural environment South Florida continued decline 1990s, life nearby cities reflected downturn. To address deterioration Miami metropolitan area, Governor Lawton Chiles commissioned report sustainability area. In 1995, Chiles published commission's findings report related degradation Everglades ecosystems lower quality life urban areas. The report noted past environmental abuses brought state position make decision. Not acting improve South Florida ecosystem, report predicted, inevitably intolerable deterioration harm local tourism 12,000jobs $200million annually, commercial fishing 3,300jobs $52million annually.[162] Urban areas grown beyond capacities sustain themselves. Crowded cities facing problems high crime rates, traffic jams, severely overcrowded schools, overtaxed public services; report noted water shortages ironic, given 53 inches (130cm) rain region received annually.[162] In 1999, evaluation CSF submitted Congress part Water Development Act 1992. The seven-year report, called "Restudy", cited indicators harm ecosystem: 50percent reduction original Everglades, diminished water storage, harmful timing water releases canals pumping stations, 85 90percent decrease wading bird populations past 50years, decline output commercial fisheries. Bodies water including Lake Okeechobee, Caloosahatchee River, St. Lucie estuary, Lake Worth Lagoon, Biscayne Bay, Florida Bay Everglades reflected drastic water level changes, hypersalinity, dramatic changes marine freshwater ecosystems. The Restudy noted overall decline water quality past 50years due loss wetlands act filters polluted water.[163] It predicted without intervention entire South Florida ecosystem deteriorate. Water shortages become common cities annual water restrictions.[164] Planned water recovery storage implementation using CERP strategies The Restudy came plan stop declining environmental quality, proposal expensive comprehensive ecological repair project history.[165] The Comprehensive Everglades Restoration Plan (CERP) proposed 60construction projects 30years store water flushed ocean, reservoirs, underground aquifers, abandoned quarries; add Stormwater Treatment Areas filter water flowed lower Everglades; regulate water released pumping stations local waterways improve water released Everglades National Park Water Conservation Areas; remove barriers sheetflow raising Tamiami Trail destroying Miami Canal, reuse wastewater urban areas.[166] The cost estimate entire plan $7.8billion, bipartisan show cooperation, CERP voted Congress overwhelming margin. It signed President Bill Clinton December 11, 2000.[167] Since signing, State Florida reports spent $2billion various projects. More 36,000 acres (150km2) Stormwater Treatment Areas constructed filter 2,500 short tons (2,300t) phosphorus Everglades waters. An STA spanning 17,000 acres (69km2) constructed 2004, making largest manmade wetland world. Fifty-five percent land necessary acquire restoration purchased State Florida, totaling 210,167 acres (850.52km2). A plan hasten construction funding projects put place, named "Acceler8", spurring start six eight large construction projects, including three large reservoirs.[168] However, federal funds forthcoming; CERP signed U.S. government budget surplus, since deficits renewed, two CERP's major supporters Congress retired. According story The New York Times, state officials say restoration lost maze "federal bureaucracy, victim 'analysis paralysis'".[169] CERP still remains controversial projects slated Acceler8, environmental activists note, benefit urban areas, regions Everglades desperate water still neglected, suggesting water diverted make room people already overtaxed environment.[170] Airboating become popular ecotourism attraction Everglades A series biennial reports U.S. National Research Council reviewed progress CERP. The fourth report series, released 2012, found little progress made restoring core remaining Everglades ecosystem; instead, project construction far occurred along periphery.[171] The report noted reverse ongoing ecosystem declines, necessary expedite restoration projects target central Everglades, improve quality quantity water ecosystem.[172] To better understand potential implications current slow pace progress, report assessed current status ten Everglades ecosystem attributes, including phosphorus loads, peat depth, populations snail kites, birds prey endangered South Florida. Most attributes received grades ranging C (degraded) D (significantly degraded), snail kite received grade F (near irreversible damage). The report also assessed future trajectory ecosystem attribute three restoration scenarios: improved water quality, improved hydrology, improvements water quality hydrology, helped highlight urgency restoration actions benefit wide range ecosystem attributes demonstrate cost inaction.[172] Overall, report concluded substantial near-term progress address water quality hydrology central Everglades needed reverse ongoing degradation late. Air crashes[edit] At least three airplanes crashed Everglades including: Northwest Orient Airlines Flight 705 (in 1963), Eastern Air Lines Flight 401 (1972), ValuJet Flight 592 (1996). Future Everglades[edit] In 2008, State Florida agreed buy U.S. Sugar manufacturing production facilities estimated $1.7billion.[173] Florida officials indicated intended allow U.S. Sugar process six years dismissing employees dismantling plant. The area, includes 187,000 acres (760km2) land, rehabilitated water flow Lake Okeechobee restored.[173] In November 2008, agreement revised offer $1.34billion, allowing sugar mills Clewiston remain production.[174] Critics revised plan say ensures sugarcane grown Everglades least another decade.[175] Further research done address continuing production sugarcane Everglades minimize phosphorus runoff.[176] Everglades restoration received $96 million American Recovery Reinvestment Act 2009.[177] As result stimulus package, mile-long (1.6km) bridge replace Tamiami Trail, road borders Everglades National Park north blocked water reaching southern Everglades, begun Army Corps Engineers December 2009. The next month work began reconstruct C-111 canal, east park historically diverted water Florida Bay.[178][179] Governor Charlie Crist announced month $50 million state funds earmarked Everglades restoration.[180] In May 2010, 5.5 miles (8.9km) bridges proposed added Tamiami Trail.[181] See also[edit] Wikimedia Commons media related Everglades. Florida portal Carr (landform) Everglades Foundation Everglades Pseudoatoll History Florida Notes references[edit] ^ U.S. Geological Survey (1999). "Florida Everglades". Circular 1182. U.S. Geological Survey. Retrieved 2008-03-14. ^ "Old Florida Maps". scholar.library.miami.edu. Retrieved 2008-08-22. ^ McMullen, Wallace (1953). "The Origin Term Everglades". American Speech. 28 (1): 26–34. doi:10.2307/454403. ^ Douglas, pp.7–8. ^ Dovell, J.E. (1947). "The Everglades Before Reclamation". The Florida Historical Quarterly. 26 (1): 1–44. ^ Lamme, Ary J.; Oldakowski, Raymond K. (2007). "Spinning New Geography Vernacular Regional Identity: Florida Twenty-First Century". Southeastern Geographer. University North Carolina Press. 47 (2): 329 334. doi:10.1353/sgo.2007.0029. ^ South Florida Water Management District (2002). "Everglades Information: Geology". "The Living Everglades". South Florida Water Management District. Archived original 2008-01-16. Retrieved 2008-03-15. ^ Lodge. p.3. ^ Lodge, p.4 ^ Gleason, Patrick, Peter Stone, "Age, Origins, Landscape Evolution Everglades Peatland" Everglades: The Ecosystem Restoration, Steven Davis John Ogden, eds. (1994), St. Lucie Press. ISBN 0-9634030-2-8 ^ Lodge, pp.6–7. ^ "Florida Geological Survey: Tamiami Formation". Florida Department Environmental Protection. January 24, 2006. Retrieved 2008-04-29. ^ UF USDA (1948), p. 26–30. ^ UF USDA (1948), p. 30–33. ^ Lodge, p.10 ^ Florida Geological Survey (2006). "Miami Limestone". Florida Department Environmental Protection. Retrieved 2008-03-15. ^ Ginsburg, Robert (March 1953). "Surface Rock Lower Everglades". Everglades Natural History. Everglades Natural History Association. 1 (1): 21–24. Archived original 2005-05-03. Retrieved 2008-03-17. ^ U.S. Geological Survey (2004). "Environmental Setting - The Natural System: Watersheds Coastal Waters (Big Cypress Watershed)". Circular 1134: The South Florida Environment - A Region Under Stress. U.S. Department Interior. Retrieved 2008-03-17. ^ Duke University Wetland Center. "Historic Everglades Basin Topography". Everglades Field Trip. Duke University. Retrieved 2008-03-15. ^ U.S. Geological Survey (2004). "Environmental Setting - The Natural System: Geology". Circular 1134: The South Florida Environment - A Region Under Stress. U.S. Department Interior. Retrieved 2008-03-15. ^ South Florida Water Management District (2008). "Lake Okeechobee Region". U.S. Department Interior. Retrieved 2008-07-21. ^ U.S. Geological Survey (2004). "Environmental Setting - The Natural System: Hydrology". Circular 1134: The South Florida Environment - A Region Under Stress. U.S. Department Interior. Retrieved 2008-03-15. ^ Fling, H.; N. Aumen; T. Armentano; F. Mazzotti (December 2004). "The Role Flow Everglades Landscape". Circular 1452. University Florida, Institute Food Agricultural Sciences (UF/IFAS). Retrieved 2008-03-15. ^ U.S. Geological Survey (2004). "Environmental Setting - The Natural System: Watersheds Coastal Waters". Circular 1134: The South Florida Environment - A Region Under Stress. U.S. Department Interior. Retrieved 2008-03-15. ^ U.S. Geological Survey (2004). "Environmental Setting - The Natural System: Climate". Circular 1134: The South Florida Environment - A Region Under Stress. U.S. Department Interior. Retrieved 2008-03-17. ^ Lodge,p.14. ^ U.S. Geological Survey (2004). "Regional Evaluation Evapotranspiration Everglades". FS-168-96. U.S. Department Interior. Retrieved 2008-03-17. ^ Obeysekera, Jayantha; Browder, J.; Hornrung, L.; Harwell, M. (October 1999). "The natural South Florida system I: Climate, geology, hydrology". Urban Ecosystems. Kluwer Academic Publishers. 3 (3/4): 223–244. doi:10.1023/A:1009552500448. ^ Lodge, p.14. ^ McCally, pp.9–10. ^ UF USDA (1948), p. 35. ^ Lodge, p. 38–39. ^ McCally, pp.12–14. ^ McCally, pp.15–17 ^ UF USDA (1948), p. 79. ^ Lodge, p.38. ^ Lodge, pp.39–41. ^ McCally, pp.18–21. ^ George, p.13. ^ Douglas, p.11. ^ Whitney, p.168. ^ Jewell, p.46. ^ Whitney,p.168. ^ George, p.42. ^ Lodge, p.31. ^ George, p.14. ^ Lodge, p.29. ^ Whitney, p.164. ^ Whitney, p.163. ^ George, pp.45–46. ^ Lodge, p.35. ^ George, p.30. ^ Douglas, pp.48–49. ^ George, p.31. ^ U.S. Fish Wildlife Service. "South Florida Multi-Species Recovery Plan: Pine rockland", Retrieved May 3, 2008. ^ George, pp.7–8. ^ "Land Resource Management Projects". DOI science plan support ecosystem restoration, preservation, protection South Florida. U.S. Geological Survey. April 26, 2007. Retrieved 2008-05-02. ^ Lodge, p.66. ^ Lodge, p.63. ^ George, p.26. ^ Lodge, p.67. ^ Ripple, p.16. ^ Jewell, p.43. ^ Ripple, p.26. ^ Ripple, pp.31–32. ^ Katherisen, K. (2001). "Biology Mangroves Mangrove Ecosystems", Advances Marine Biology, Alan J. Southward (ed.) 40, pp.18–251. ISBN 978-0-12-026140-6. ^ Ripple, p.80. ^ George, p.19. ^ Jewell, p.41. ^ Whitney, p.286. ^ "About Florida Bay". Sea Grant Florida. July 16, 2001. Retrieved 2008-06-08. ^ Humphreys, Jay; Franz, Shelley; Seaman, Bill (March 1993). "Florida's Estuaries: A Citizen's Guide Coastal Living Conservation" (PDF). National Atmosphere Oceanic Administration Florida Department Community Affairs. Retrieved 2008-06-08. ^ "Ecosystems: Marine Estuarine". National Park Service. July 30, 2007. Retrieved 2008-05-04. ^ George, p.21. ^ Whitney, pp.313–316. ^ McCally, p.34. ^ McCally, p.35. ^ McCally, pp.37–39. ^ Tebeau (1968), pp.38–41. ^ McCally, p.39. ^ Griffin, p.171. ^ Griffin, p.170. ^ Griffin, p.173. ^ Goggin, John (1940). "The Tekesta Indians Southern Florida". The Florida Historical Quarterly. 18 (4): 274–285. ^ Worth, John E. A history Southeastern Indians Cuba, 1513-1823. Florida Museum Natural History, 2004. (Pages 5-6) ^ Tebeau, p.43. ^ Tebeau, p.45. ^ Griffin, p.180. ^ Skinner, Alanson (1913). "Notes Florida Seminole". American Anthropologist. 15 (1): 63–77. doi:10.1525/aa.1913.15.1.02a00070. ^ Tebeau, pp.50–51 ^ Tebeau, pp.55–56. ^ "Images Florida Seminoles Sunshine State". Florida Memory Project: Tourism. c. 1880. Archived original June 3, 2008. Retrieved 2008-06-20. ^ "Tourism/Enterprises". Seminole Tribe Florida. 2007. Archived original 2008-02-03. Retrieved 2008-04-30. ^ Tebeau, pp.66–67. ^ Grunwald, p.42. ^ McCally, pp.65–69. ^ Stephan, L. Lamar (1942). "Geographic Role Everglades Early History Florida". The Scientific Monthly. 55 (6): 515–526. ^ Meindl, Christopher; al. ""(December, 2002). "On Importance Claims-Making: The Role James O. Wright Promoting Drainage Florida's Everglades Early Twentieth Century". Annals Association American Geographers. 92 (4): 682–701. doi:10.1111/1467-8306.00311. CS1 maint: Explicit al. (link) ^ Dovell, Junius (1948). "The Everglades: A Florida Frontier". Agricultural History. 22 (3): 187–197. ^ Davis, T. Frederick (1939). "The Disston Land Purchase". The Florida Historical Quarterly. 17 (3): 201–211. ^ Grunwald, pp.92–93. ^ Douglas p.286. ^ "Henry Flagler," Encyclopedia World Biography Supplement, Vol. 21. Gale Group, 2001. ^ "Henry Morrison Flagler." Dictionary American Biography Base Set. American Council Learned Societies, 1928-1936. ^ Bramson, Seth (1998). "A Tale Three Henrys", The Journal Decorative Propaganda Arts, 23, Florida Theme Issue, pp.113–143. ^ Bush, Gregory (1999). "Playground USA". The Pacific Historical Review. 62 (2): 153–172. ^ Carter, p.78. ^ Grunwald, pp.148–149. ^ McCally, pp.124–126. ^ Douglas, p.318. ^ McCally, p.117. ^ Grunwald, p.120. ^ Douglas, p.310. ^ McCally, pp. 117–118. ^ Douglas, p.330. ^ Douglas, p.334. ^ Grunwald, p.179. ^ Grunwald, pp.198–199. ^ Grunwald, pp.199–200. ^ McCally, p.9. ^ McCally, p.142. ^ "Conservation efforts". Everglades National Park. National Park Service. September 17, 2007. Retrieved 2008-05-10. ^ Davis, Jack (2001). "Green Awakening: Social activism evolution Marjory Stoneman Douglas's Environmental Consciousness". The Florida Historical Quarterly. 80 (1): 43–77. ^ Douglas, p.349. ^ Grunwald, p.219. ^ Lodge, p.224. ^ Grunwald, p.229. ^ Caulfield, p.55. ^ Lodge, p.223. ^ McCally, pp.159–160. ^ Lodge, pp.225–226. ^ McCally, pp.172–173. ^ Grunwald, pp.283–284. ^ Grunwald,p. 257. ^ Brooks, Paul (July 12, 1969). "Topics: Everglades Jetport — A Blueprint Disaster". The New York Times. p.26. ^ "Jets v. Everglades". Time Magazine. August 22, 1969. Retrieved 2008-05-10. ^ Nixon, Richard (February 8, 1972). "51 - Special Message Congress Outlining 1972 Environmental Program". The American Presidency Project. Retrieved 2008-05-10. ^ "Environmental Setting: The Altered System". Circular 1134. U.S. Geological Survey. November 2, 2004. Retrieved 2008-05-19. ^ Davis, Jack (2003). "'Conservation dead word': Marjory Stoneman Douglas transformation American environmentalism". Environmental History. 8 (1): 53–76. doi:10.2307/3985972. ^ Angier, Natalie (August 6, 1984). "Now You See It, Now You Don't". Time. Retrieved 2008-05-20. ^ "Kissimee River History". Florida Department Environmental Protection. 2006. Retrieved 2008-05-19. ^ "Kissimmee River Restoration". www.saj.usace.army.mil. Retrieved 2017-04-07. ^ Lodge, p.230. ^ Davis, Steven. "Phosphorus Inputs Vegetation Sensitivity Everglades" Everglades: The Ecosystem Restoration, Steven Davis John Ogden, eds. (1994), St. Lucie Press. ISBN 0-9634030-2-8 ^ Lodge, pp.231–233. ^ "Florida Statutes (Supplement 1994) [Everglades Forever Act]". Chapter 373: Water Resources, Part IV. Management Storage Surface Waters, 373.4592 Everglades improvement management. University Miami School Law. 1997. Retrieved 2008-05-21. ^ "Periphyton-based Stormwater Treatment Area (PSTA) Technology" (PDF). The Journey Restore America's Everglades. December 2003. Retrieved 2008-05-22. ^ Ferriter, (2004), p. 1. ^ Florida Invaders, National Park Service Florida Fish Wildlife Conservation Commission. Retrieved February 3, 2010. ^ Rodgers, al, p. 9-2. ^ Lodge, pp.237–240. ^ Tasker, Georgia (August 22, 1998). "Federal Experts Warn Alien Plant Invasion", The Miami Herald. ^ Lodge, p.241. ^ Lodge, p.242. ^ Lodge, pp.243–244. ^ Lodge, p.244. ^ "Snake bursts gobbling gator". BBC News. October 5, 2005. Retrieved 2008-03-14. ^ "Burmese Pythons - Everglades National Park (U.S. National Park Service)". www.nps.gov. Retrieved 2017-04-07. ^ Segal, Kim (January 17, 2012). U.S. bans imports 4 exotic snake species, CNN. Retrieved January 17, 2012. ^ Dorcas, M. E.; Willson, J. D.; Reed, R. N.; Snow, R. W.; Rochford, M. R.; Miller, M. A.; Meshaka, W. E.; Andreadis, P. T.; Mazzotti, F. J.; Romagosa, C. M.; Hart, K. M. (2011-12-21). "Severe mammal declines coincide proliferation invasive Burmese pythons Everglades National Park". Proceedings National Academy Sciences. 109 (7): 2418–2422. doi:10.1073/pnas.1115226109. ISSN0027-8424. PMC3289325. PMID22308381. ^ Lodge, pp. 244–245. ^ "Chapter 1: Background understanding". The Governor's Commission Sustainable South Florida. State Florida. October 1, 1995. Retrieved 2008-05-23. ^ US Army COE SFWMD, p.iii. ^ US Army COE SFWMD, pp.iv–v. ^ Schmitt, Eric (October 20, 2000). "Everglades Restoration Plan Passes House, With Final Approval Seen", The New York Times, p. 1. ^ US Army COE SFWMD, pp.vii–ix. ^ "Water Resources Development Act (WRDA) 2000". The Journey Restore America's Everglades. November 4, 2002. Retrieved 2008-05-23. ^ "Restoring River Grass". Florida Department Environmental Protection. 2006. Retrieved 2008-05-24. ^ Goodnough, Abby (November 2, 2007). "Vast Effort Save Everglades Falters U.S. Funds Dwindle", The New York Times, Section A, p.1. ^ Grunwald, Michael (October 14, 2004). "Fla. Steps In Speed Up State-Federal Everglades Cleanup", The Washington Post, p.A03. ^ National Research Council report Progress Toward Restoring Everglades: The Fourth Biennial Review 2012, http://dels.nas.edu/Report/Progress-Toward-Restoring-Everglades/13422 ^ National Research Council Report-in-Brief, Progress Toward Restoring Everglades: The Fourth Biennial Review 2012, http://dels.nas.edu/Materials/Report-In-Brief/4296-Everglades ^ Damien Cave; John Holusha (2008-06-24). "Florida Buy Sugar Maker Bid Restore Everglades". The New York Times. Retrieved 2008-06-24. ^ Cave, Damien (November 12, 2008). "Everglades Deal Shrinks Sale Land, Not Assets", The New York Times, p. 16. ^ Bussey, Jane, Morgan, Curtis (November 16, 2008). "Land deal lift U.S. Sugar's sagging fortunes: Is buyout bailout? Either way, pending deal sell land state Everglades restoration reverse Big Sugar's flagging finances", The Miami Herald (Florida). ^ Yao, Stephanie (March 24, 2010). Sugarcane Okay Standing Water, Helps Protect Everglades, Agricultural Research Service U.S. Department Agriculture. Retrieved August 9, 2010. ^ Morgan, Curtis, Clark, Lesley (April 29, 2009). "River Cash: Stimulus Aid Glades", The Miami Herald, p1A. ^ Morgan, Curtis (January 27, 2010). "Canal work begins Everglades project", The Miami Herald, South Florida news. ^ Jackson, Susan (December 2009). Everglades supporters celebrate Tamiami Trail groundbreaking, Army Corps Engineers Bulletin Jaxstrong, 1 (4), p. 3. Retrieved February 11, 2010. ^ Skoloff, Brian (January 22, 2010). "Gov. Crist proposes $2.1 billion environment", The Miami Herald, Florida news. ^ Gibson, William (May 19, 2010). Federal officials plan add bridges let Everglades water flow U.S. 41, Florida Sun-Sentinel. Retrieved August 9, 2010. Bibliography[edit] Barnett, Cynthia (2007). Mirage: Florida Vanishing Water Eastern U.S., University Michigan Press. ISBN 0-472-11563-4 Carter, W. Hodding (2004). Stolen Water: Saving Everglades Friends, Foes, Florida, Atria Books. ISBN 0-7434-7407-4 Caulfield, Patricia (1970) Everglades, Sierra Club / Ballantine Books. ISBN 0-345-02353-6 Douglas, Marjory S. (1947). The Everglades: River Grass. R. Bemis Publishing. ISBN 0-912451-44-0 Douglas, Marjory; Rothchild, John (1987). Marjory Stoneman Douglas: Voice River. Pineapple Press. ISBN 0-910923-94-9 Ferriter, Amy; Serbesoff-King, Kristina; Bodle, Mike; Goodyear, Carole; Doren, Bob; Langeland, Ken (2004). Chapter 8E: Exotic Species Everglades Protection Area, South Florida Water Management District George, Jean (1972). Everglades Wildguide. National Park Service. Gov. doc #I 29.62:Ev2 Griffin, John (2002). Archeology Everglades. University Press Florida. ISBN 0-8130-2558-3 Grunwald, Michael (2006). The Swamp: The Everglades, Florida, Politics Paradise. New York: Simon Schuster. ISBN 0-7432-5107-5 Hann, John (ed.) (1991). Missions Calusa. University Press Florida. ISBN 0-8130-1966-4 Jewell, Susan (1993). Exploring Wild South Florida: A Guide Finding Natural Areas Wildlife Everglades Florida Keys, Pineapple Press, Inc. ISBN 1-56164-023-9 Lodge, Thomas E. (2005). The Everglades Handbook. Understanding Ecosystem. CRC Press. ISBN 1-884015-06-9 McCally, David (1999). The Everglades: An Environmental History. University Press Florida. ISBN 0-8130-2302-5 Ripple, Jeff (1992). Big Cypress Swamp Ten Thousand Islands: Eastern America's Last Great Wilderness, University South Carolina Press. ISBN 0-87249-842-5 Tebeau, Charlton (1968). Man Everglades: 2000 Years Human History Everglades National Park. University Miami Press. Toops, Connie (1998). The Florida Everglades. Voyageur Press. ISBN 0-89658-372-4 U.S. Army Corps Engineers South Florida Water Management District (April 1999). "Summary", Central Southern Florida Project Comprehensive Review Study. University Florida Agricultural Experiment Station United States Department Agriculture Soil Conservation Service (March 1948). Bulletin 442: Soils, Geology, Water Control Everglades Region. Whitney, Ellie al., eds. (2004) Priceless Florida: Natural Ecosystems Native Species. Pineapple Press, Inc. ISBN 978-1-56164-309-7 Wilhelm, Chris, “Pragmatism, Seminoles, Science: Opposition Progressive Everglades Drainage,” Florida Historical Quarterly, 90 (Spring 2012), 426–52. External links[edit] Geography ecology Everglades National Park Big Cypress National Preserve Arthur R. Marshall National Wildlife Refuge (US Fish Wildlife Service) Everglades Cooperative Invasive Species Management Area History A History Everglades Rizzardi, Keith W. (March 1, 2001). "A Recent History Everglades Regulation Litigation". Florida Bar Journal. History information Everglades World Digital Library Public television series episode history Florida Everglades Restoration The Comprehensive Everglades Restoration Plan (CERP) The Everglades Foundation The Everglades Coalition South Florida Information Access (U.S. Geological Survey) Environment Florida – Founders The "Save The Everglades" campaign ACCELER8 (Everglades Restoration) Friends Everglades South Florida Environmental Report (South Florida Water Management District Florida DEP) Media Everglades Digital Library Water's Journey: Everglades – Comprehensive film web documentary Everglades The Everglades Time Marjorie Stoneman Douglas (Photo exhibit) Everglades images bioimages.vanderbilt.edu (Slow modem version) The Everglades Peril - slideshow The New York Times Coordinates: 26°00′N 80°42′W﻿ / ﻿26.0°N 80.7°W﻿ / 26.0; -80.7 Everglades Geography ecology Indigenous people Draining development Restoration Everglades National Park Invasive species People Guy Bradley Ernest F. Coe Hamilton Disston Marjory Stoneman Douglas Arthur R. Marshall Garald G. Parker Protected areas Big Cypress National Preserve Biscayne National Park Corkscrew Swamp Sanctuary Fakahatchee Strand Preserve State Park Florida Keys National Marine Sanctuary Florida Panther National Wildlife Refuge Loxahatchee National Wildlife Refuge Bodies water Biscayne Bay Caloosahatchee River Fisheating Creek Florida Bay Indian River Lagoon Kissimmee River Lake Okeechobee Lake Worth Lagoon Shark River St. Lucie River Taylor Slough See also Alligator Alley Biscayne Aquifer Burmese pythons Florida Comprehensive Everglades Restoration Plan Environmental Impact Big Cypress Swamp Jetport Everglades Foundation Friends Everglades Homestead Air Force Base South Florida Water Management District Tamiami Trail U.S. Sugar Book:Everglades Category:Everglades Portal:Florida Significant waterways Florida Larger rivers Alapaha Apalachicola Aucilla Blackwater Caloosahatchee Chattahoochee Chipola Choctawhatchee Econlockhatchee Escambia Hillsborough Indian River Kissimmee Myakka Ochlockonee Ocklawaha Pea Peace Perdido Santa Fe St. Johns St. Marys Suwannee Withlacoochee (North) Withlacoochee (South) Yellow Lakes Apopka Crescent Blue Cypress East Tohopekaliga George Harney Harris Iamonia Istokpoga Jackson Jesup Kissimmee Manatee Miccosukee Monroe Okeechobee Poinsett Rodman Rousseau Seminole Talquin Tohopekaliga Tsala Apopka Ward Washington Weir Smaller rivers Alafia Alapahoochee Anclote Banana River Braden Carrabelle Chassahowitzka Crooked Crystal Dead East East Bay Eau Gallie Econfina Estero Homosassa Hontoon Dead Ichetucknee Imperial Little (Biscayne Bay) Little (Ochlockonee) Little Econlockhatchee Little Manatee Little Wekiva Loxahatchee Manatee Matanzas Miami Mosquito Lagoon New (Broward) New (Carabelle) New (Santa Fe) Oleta Orange Pithlachascotee Rainbow Ribault Shark Silver Sopchoppy St. Lucie St. Marks St. Sebastian Steinhatchee Tomoka Trout Waccasassa Wacissa Wakulla Weeki Wachee Wekiva Creeks streams Billy's Black Blackwater (Hillsborough) Blackwater (Lake) Crane Cross Econfina Fisheating Myakkahatchee Orange Pottsburg Shingle Snapper Turkey Canals Canaveral Barge Canal Cross Florida Barge Canal Haulover Canal Hillsboro Canal Miami Canal Mud Lake Canal St. Johns-Indian River Barge Canal Tamiami Canal Tampa Bypass Canal See also Coastal waters Florida Everglades Intracoastal Waterway Indian River Lagoon List Florida rivers List major springs Florida Okeechobee Waterway Okefenokee Swamp Outstanding Florida Waters Paynes Prairie Municipalities communities Monroe County, Florida, United States County seat: Key West Cities Key Colony Beach Key West Layton Marathon Village Islamorada CDPs Big Coppitt Key Big Pine Key Cudjoe Key Duck Key Key Largo North Key Largo Stock Island Tavernier Unincorporated communities Anglers Park Bay Point Chatham Conch Key Dry Tortugas El Chico Garden Cove Grayvik Jewfish Key Haven Newport Pirates Cove Rock Harbor Sugarloaf Shores Summerland Key Sunset Point Thompson Trail Center Ghost towns Chevelier Flamingo Fort Jefferson Indian Key Perky Pigeon Key Pinecrest Snake Bight Retrieved "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Evergladesoldid=774352093" Categories: EvergladesFlooded grasslands savannasNeotropic ecoregionsEcoregions FloridaMarshes FloridaSwamps FloridaBiodiversity hotspotsNatural regionsWetlands FloridaHidden categories: CS1 maint: Explicit al.Pages using ISBN magic linksWikipedia indefinitely move-protected pagesCoordinates WikidataGood articles Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main pageContentsFeatured contentCurrent eventsRandom articleDonate WikipediaWikipedia store Interaction HelpAbout WikipediaCommunity portalRecent changesContact page Tools What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationWikidata itemCite page Print/export Create bookDownload PDFPrintable version In projects Wikimedia Commons Languages العربيةBrezhonegCatalàEspañolEsperantoEuskaraفارسیFrançaisIdoBahasa IndonesiaItalianoKiswahiliLietuviųNederlands日本語Norsk nynorskPortuguêsРусскийSimple EnglishSlovenščinaСрпски / srpskiSuomiSvenskaTürkçeУкраїнська中文 Edit links This page last modified 7 April 2017, 21:11. Text available Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using site, agree Terms Use Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® registered trademark Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view (window.RLQ=window.RLQ||[]).push(function(){mw.config.set({"wgPageParseReport":{"limitreport":{"cputime":"0.944","walltime":"1.073","ppvisitednodes":{"value":7366,"limit":1000000},"ppgeneratednodes":{"value":0,"limit":1500000},"postexpandincludesize":{"value":156397,"limit":2097152},"templateargumentsize":{"value":4120,"limit":2097152},"expansiondepth":{"value":15,"limit":40},"expensivefunctioncount":{"value":1,"limit":500},"entityaccesscount":{"value":1,"limit":400},"timingprofile":["100.00% 869.518 1 -total"," 37.17% 323.188 1 Template:Reflist"," 16.58% 144.185 31 Template:Cite_web"," 14.50% 126.105 1 Template:Infobox_settlement"," 13.96% 121.341 70 Template:Convert"," 9.73% 84.615 2 Template:Infobox"," 7.70% 66.974 16 Template:Cite_journal"," 3.29% 28.610 1 Template:Commons_category"," 2.99% 26.010 5 Template:Cite_news"," 2.71% 23.569 1 Template:Other_uses"]},"scribunto":{"limitreport-timeusage":{"value":"0.379","limit":"10.000"},"limitreport-memusage":{"value":8802608,"limit":52428800}},"cachereport":{"origin":"mw1302","timestamp":"20170407211134","ttl":2592000,"transientcontent":false}}});});(window.RLQ=window.RLQ||[]).push(function(){mw.config.set({"wgBackendResponseTime":61,"wgHostname":"mw1257"});});