portal:history - wikipedia document.documentelement.classname = document.documentelement.classname.replace( /(^|\s)client-nojs(\s|$)/, "$1client-js$2" ); (window.rlq=window.rlq||[]).push(function(){mw.config.set({"wgcanonicalnamespace":"portal","wgcanonicalspecialpagename":false,"wgnamespacenumber":100,"wgpagename":"portal:history","wgtitle":"history","wgcurrevisionid":749756545,"wgrevisionid":749756545,"wgarticleid":1685624,"wgisarticle":true,"wgisredirect":false,"wgaction":"view","wgusername":null,"wgusergroups":["*"],"wgcategories":["wikipedia semi-protected portals","featured portals","history portal","history portals","history"],"wgbreakframes":false,"wgpagecontentlanguage":"en","wgpagecontentmodel":"wikitext","wgseparatortransformtable":["",""],"wgdigittransformtable":["",""],"wgdefaultdateformat":"dmy","wgmonthnames":["","january","february","march","april","may","june","july","august","september","october","november","december"],"wgmonthnamesshort":["","jan","feb","mar","apr","may","jun","jul","aug","sep","oct","nov","dec"],"wgrelevantpagename":"portal:history","wgrelevantarticleid":1685624,"wgrequestid":"wo5qsapaic0aad9f0y8aaacm","wgisprobablyeditable":false,"wgrestrictionedit":["autoconfirmed"],"wgrestrictionmove":["sysop"],"wgflaggedrevsparams":{"tags":{}},"wgstablerevisionid":null,"wgwikieditorenabledmodules":{"toolbar":true,"dialogs":true,"preview":false,"publish":false},"wgbetafeaturesfeatures":[],"wgmediavieweronclick":true,"wgmediaviewerenabledbydefault":true,"wgpopupsshouldsendmoduletouser":false,"wgpopupsconflictswithnavpopupgadget":false,"wgvisualeditor":{"pagelanguagecode":"en","pagelanguagedir":"ltr","usepageimages":true,"usepagedescriptions":true},"wgpreferredvariant":"en","wgmfdisplaywikibasedescriptions":{"search":true,"nearby":true,"watchlist":true,"tagline":false},"wgrelatedarticles":null,"wgrelatedarticlesbetafeatureenabled":false,"wgrelatedarticlesusecirrussearch":true,"wgrelatedarticlesonlyusecirrussearch":false,"wgulscurrentautonym":"english","wgnoticeproject":"wikipedia","wgcentralnoticecookiestodelete":[],"wgcentralnoticecategoriesusinglegacy":["fundraising","fundraising"],"wgcategorytreepagecategoryoptions":"{\"mode\":0,\"hideprefix\":20,\"showcount\":true,\"namespaces\":false}","wgwikibaseitemid":"q175361","wgcentralauthmobiledomain":false,"wgvisualeditortoolbarscrolloffset":0,"wgeditsubmitbuttonlabelpublish":false});mw.loader.state({"ext.globalcssjs.user.styles":"ready","ext.globalcssjs.site.styles":"ready","site.styles":"ready","noscript":"ready","user.styles":"ready","user":"ready","user.options":"loading","user.tokens":"loading","ext.categorytree.css":"ready","wikibase.client.init":"ready","ext.visualeditor.desktoparticletarget.noscript":"ready","ext.uls.interlanguage":"ready","ext.wikimediabadges":"ready","mediawiki.legacy.shared":"ready","mediawiki.legacy.commonprint":"ready","mediawiki.sectionanchor":"ready","mediawiki.skinning.interface":"ready","skins.vector.styles":"ready","ext.globalcssjs.user":"ready","ext.globalcssjs.site":"ready"});mw.loader.implement("user.options@0j3lz3q",function($,jquery,require,module){mw.user.options.set({"variant":"en"});});mw.loader.implement("user.tokens@1dqfd7l",function ( $, jquery, require, module ) { mw.user.tokens.set({"edittoken":"+\\","patroltoken":"+\\","watchtoken":"+\\","csrftoken":"+\\"});/*@nomin*/; });mw.loader.load(["ext.categorytree","mediawiki.action.view.postedit","site","mediawiki.page.startup","mediawiki.user","mediawiki.hidpi","mediawiki.page.ready","mediawiki.legacy.wikibits","mediawiki.searchsuggest","ext.gadget.teahouse","ext.gadget.referencetooltips","ext.gadget.watchlist-notice","ext.gadget.drn-wizard","ext.gadget.charinsert","ext.gadget.reftoolbar","ext.gadget.extra-toolbar-buttons","ext.gadget.switcher","ext.gadget.featured-articles-links","ext.centralauth.centralautologin","mmv.head","mmv.bootstrap.autostart","ext.visualeditor.desktoparticletarget.init","ext.visualeditor.targetloader","ext.eventlogging.subscriber","ext.wikimediaevents","ext.navigationtiming","ext.uls.eventlogger","ext.uls.init","ext.uls.interface","ext.centralnotice.geoip","ext.centralnotice.startup","skins.vector.js"]);}); portal:history wikipedia, free encyclopedia jump to: navigation, search topics culture geography health history mathematics nature people philosophy religion society technology history ancient egypt ancient germanic culture ancient greece ancient japan ancient near east ancient rome anglo-saxon england archaeology austria-hungary british empire bulgarian empire byzantine empire classical civilisation colonialism crusades dacia disasters german empire heraldry history canada history science imperial china indian independence movement khitan latter day saint movement middle ages mughal empire new france ottoman empire russian empire sasanian empire seljuk empire soviet union war edit history portal historians' history world history discovery, collection, organization, analysis, presentation information past events. history also mean continuous, typically chronological record important public events particular trend institution. scholars write history called historians. field knowledge uses narrative examine analyse sequence events, sometimes attempts objectively investigate patterns cause effect determine events. historians debate nature history usefulness. includes discussing study discipline end way providing "perspective" problems present. stories common particular culture supported external sources (such legends surrounding king arthur) usually classified cultural heritage rather "disinterested investigation" needed discipline history. events past prior written record considered prehistory. amongst scholars, fifth century bc greek historian herodotus considered "father history"; methods herodotus along contemporary thucydides form foundations modern study history. influence (along other historical traditions other parts world) spawned many different interpretations nature history developed centuries continuing change. modern study history many different fields, including focus certain regions focus certain topical thematic elements historical investigation. often, history taught part primary secondary education, academic study history major discipline university studies. history… view new selections (purge) edit selected article formal unification germany politically administratively integrated nation state officially occurred 18 january 1871 versailles palace's hall mirrors france. princes german states gathered proclaim wilhelm prussia emperor wilhelm german empire french capitulation franco-prussian war. unofficially, transition german-speaking populations federated organization states occurred nearly century experimentation. unification exposed several glaring religious, linguistic, social, cultural differences among inhabitants new nation, suggesting 1871 represents one moment continuum larger unification processes. model diplomatic spheres influence resulting congress vienna 1814–15 napoleonic wars endorsed austrian dominance central europe. however, negotiators vienna took account prussia's growing strength within among german states, failing foresee prussia would challenge austria leadership within german states. german dualism presented two solutions problem unification: kleindeutsche lösung, small germany solution (germany without austria), großdeutsche lösung, greater germany solution (germany austria). reaction danish french nationalism provided foci expressions german unity. military successes—especially prussian ones—in three regional wars generated enthusiasm pride politicians could harness promote unification. experience echoed memory mutual accomplishment napoleonic wars, particularly war liberation 1813–14. establishing germany without austria, political administrative unification 1871 least temporarily solved problem dualism. ...archive/nominations read more... edit selected biography joel brand (april 25, 1906 – july 13, 1964) hungarian sailor odd-job man became known role holocaust trying save hungarian-jewish community deportation auschwitz concentration camp. described historian yehuda bauer brave adventurer felt home underground conspiracies card-playing circles, brand teamed fellow zionists budapest form aid rescue committee, group helped jewish refugees nazi-occupied europe escape relative safety hungary, germans invaded country march 1944. shortly invasion, brand asked ss officer adolf eichmann help broker deal ss united states britain. eichmann said would release one million hungarian jews, western allies would supply germany 10,000 trucks large quantities soap, tea, coffee. negotiations, described times one loathsome stories war, became known "blood goods" proposal. nothing came historians guess whether eichmann's offer genuine. theories trick intended persuade jewish community board trains auschwitz thinking resettled, cover high-ranking ss officials negotiate peace deal u.s. britain excluded soviet union perhaps even adolf hitler himself. ...archive/nominations read more... edit know... ... soviet tupolev tu-142 (pictured) maritime patrol aircraft developed response american ugm-27 polaris submarine-launched ballistic missile? ... harry powers said watching victims die fun brothel? ... effort put forth subject miró's 1937 naked woman climbing staircase heavy limbs thought reflect tragedy spanish civil war? ... 49% german military losses happened last 10 months second world war europe? ... thomas edison lost fortune ore-milling company, "had hell good time spending it"? ... american mccaull comic opera company actress may yohé, owner hope diamond, died poor? ... egyptian political cartoonist ahmad nady took part 2011 egyptian revolution, drawing cartoons demonstrated? ... finds unearthed israelite tower jerusalem's jewish quarter attest babylonian sack city 586 bce? ...archive/nominations more... edit selected picture montgolfier brothers' balloon, 75 feet tall 50 feet wide, first balloon carry human passengers 1783. etching 1786 depicts historical flight engineering properties description elaborate design. ...archive/nominations read more... edit day april 12: yuri's night; cosmonautics day russia terry fox 1776 – fourth north carolina provincial congress passed halifax resolves, first official action american colonies calling independence britain american revolution. 1831 – broughton suspension bridge manchester, england, collapsed, reportedly mechanical resonance induced troops marching step bridge. 1910 – smszrínyi, one last pre-dreadnoughts built austro-hungarian navy, launched. 1980 – terry fox (pictured) dipped artificial leg atlantic ocean st. john's, newfoundland labrador, began running "marathon hope" towards pacific ocean vancouver, british columbia, raise funds across canada cancer research. 2007 – canteen council representatives iraq building attacked suicide bomber, killing one member parliament wounding 23 other people. peter hesketh-fleetwood (d.1866)· beverly cleary (b.1916)· xin fengxia (d.1998) anniversaries: april 11 april 12 april 13 archive email list historical anniversaries edit selected quote victorious warriors win first go war, defeated warriors go war first seek win. — sun tzu, ancient chinese military strategist ...archive more... edit selected portal ancient rome "the traveler contemplated ruins ancient rome may conceive some imperfect idea sentiments must inspired reared heads splendor unsullied beauty." — edward gibbon ...archive/nominations read more... edit things some open tasks: copy/edit: hongwu emperor, indian independence movement, modern history, more... wikify: merge: more... requests: , more... stubs: panhellenic liberation movement, more... requested pictures - history topics historian, i.e. one studies writes history, keen interest writing outstanding articles? join fine group adding category:wikipedian historians bottom user page. edit wikiprojects history ancient near east • australian history • classical greece rome • dacia • former countries • history canada • chinese history • european history • heraldry vexillology • indian history • jewish history • medieval scotland • mesoamerica • military history • middle ages • history science time days year • years biography composers • political figures • saints • united states presidents topics v e social sciences primary anthropology archaeology cultural linguistics social economics microeconomics macroeconomics geography human integrative history cultural economic political social law jurisprudence legal history legal systems political science international relations psephology public administration public policy psychology abnormal biological cognitive developmental personality social sociology criminology demography internet rural urban interdisciplinary anthrozoology area studies business studies cognitive science communication studies community studies cultural studies development studies education environmental (social science studies) food studies gender studies global studies history technology human ecology information science international studies media studies philosophy science economics history psychology social science planning land use regional urban political ecology political economy public health regional science science technology studies science studies historical social work other categorizations humanities geisteswissenschaft human science index journals outline wikiversity v e humanities anthropology digital humanities history law literature performing arts politics philosophy religious studies visual arts v e time key concepts human life nature past history deep time present future futures studies far future religion far future science fiction popular culture timeline far future eternity eternity world measurement standards chronometry utc ut tai unit time planck time second minute hour day week month year decade century millennium tropical year sidereal year measurement systems time zone 12-hour clock 24-hour clock daylight saving time solar time sidereal time metric time decimal time hexadecimal time calendars gregorian julian hebrew islamic lunar solar hijri mayan intercalation leap second leap year clocks horology history timekeeping devices main types astrarium atomic quantum marine sundial sundial markup schema watch water-based chronology history astronomical chronology big history calendar era chronicle deep time periodization regnal year timeline religion mythology dreamtime kāla kalachakra prophecy time fate deities wheel time immortality philosophy time a-series b-series b-theory time causality duration endurantism eternal return eternalism event perdurantism presentism temporal finitism temporal parts unreality time human experience use time accounting period chronemics fiscal year generation time mental chronometry music procrastination punctuality temporal database term time discipline time management time perception specious present time-tracking software time-use research time-based currency (time banking) time value money time clock timesheet yesterday time geology geological time age chron eon epoch era period geochronology geological history earth physics absolute time space arrow time chronon coordinate time imaginary time planck epoch planck time proper time rate spacetime theory relativity time dilation gravitational time domain t-symmetry other subject areas chronological dating chronobiology circadian rhythms dating methodologies archaeology time geography related topics carpe diem clock position space system time tempus fugit time capsule time complexity time signature time travel time portal v e chronology key topics archaeology astronomy geology history human life nature paleontology time eras epochs calendar eras human era ab urbe condita anno domini/ common era anno mundi byzantine era seleucid era spanish era present hijri egyptian sothic cycle hindu units time (yuga) mesoamerican long count short count tzolk'in haab' regnal year canon kings lists kings limmu era names chinese japanese korean vietnamese calendars pre-julian/ julian pre-julian roman original julian proleptic julian revised julian gregorian gregorian proleptic gregorian old style new style dates adoption gregorian calendar dual dating astronomical lunisolar solar lunar astronomical year numbering others chinese sexagenary cycle geologic calendar hebrew iranian islamic iso week date mesoamerican maya aztec winter count (plains indians) astronomic time cosmic calendar ephemeris galactic year metonic cycle milankovitch cycles geologic time concepts deep time geological history earth geological time units standards global standard stratigraphic age (gssa) global boundary stratotype section point (gssp) methods chronostratigraphy geochronology isotope geochemistry law superposition luminescence dating samarium-neodymium dating chronological dating absolute dating amino acid racemisation archaeomagnetic dating dendrochronology ice core incremental dating lichenometry paleomagnetism radiometric dating radiocarbon uranium–lead potassium-argon tephrochronology luminescence dating relative dating fluorine absorption nitrogen dating obsidian hydration seriation stratigraphy genetic methods molecular clock linguistic methods glottochronology related topics chronicle new chronology periodization synchronoptic view timeline year zero circa floruit terminus post quem aspro chronology portal edit categories history • period • region • topic • ethnic group • historiography • archaeology • books • documents • maps • images • magazines • organizations • fictional • museums • pseudohistory • stubs • timelines • chronology • people • wikipedia historians ▼ history ► history ethnic group ► history location ► history period ► history topic ► fields history ► historians ► history-related lists ► history awards ► bible history ► chronology ► historical controversies ► economic, social political strategies ► history education ► historical eras ► events ► historically themed events ► historical geography ► historicity ► historiography ► legacies ► media history ► historical objects ► oral history ► history organizations ► phaleristics ► philosophy history ► historic preservation ► pseudohistory ► sacred history ► theories history ► historical timelines ► works history ► world history ► wikipedia books history ► history images ► history stubs associated wikimedia following wikimedia sister projects provide subject: wikibooks books commons media wikinews news wikiquote quotations wikisource texts wikiversity learning resources wikivoyage travel guides wiktionary definitions wikidata database wikispecies species portals? list portals featured portals retrieved "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=portal:historyoldid=749756545" categories: history portalhistory portalshistoryhidden categories: wikipedia semi-protected portalsfeatured portals navigation menu personal tools logged intalkcontributionscreate accountlog namespaces portal talk variants views read view source view history search navigation main pagecontentsfeatured contentcurrent eventsrandom articledonate wikipediawikipedia store interaction helpabout wikipediacommunity portalrecent changescontact page tools links hererelated changesupload filespecial pagespermanent linkpage informationwikidata item print/export create bookdownload pdfprintable version other projects wikibookswikisourcewikiversity languages АдыгабзэafrikaansalemannischአማርኛÆngliscالعربيةتۆرکجهবাংলাБашҡортсаБеларуская (тарашкевіца)‎БългарскиboarischbrezhonegcatalàcebuanoČeštinacymraegdanskdeutscheestiΕλληνικάespañoleuskaraفارسیfrançaisfryskgagauzgalegogĩkũyũ한국어Հայերենhrvatskibahasa indonesiaitalianoעבריתbasa jawakapampanganქართულიҚазақшаkurdîКыргызчаlatinalatviešulëtzebuergeschlietuviųmagyarМакедонскиമലയാളംमराठीمصرىمازِرونیbahasa melayuမြန်မာဘာသာnederlands日本語napulitanoНохчийнnorsk bokmålnorsk nynorskoccitanoʻzbekcha/ўзбекчаਪੰਜਾਬੀپنجابیپښتوplattdüütschpolskiportuguêsromânăruna simiРусскийseelterskshqipසිංහලslovenčinaslovenščinasoomaaligaکوردیی ناوەندیСрпски / srpskisuomisvenskatagalogதமிழ்taqbaylitТатарча/tatarçaไทยТоҷикӣtürkçeУкраїнськаاردوtiếng việt文言west-vlamswolof吴语xitsonga粵語zazaki中文 edit links page last modified 16 november 2016, 00:57. text available creative commons attribution-sharealike license; additional terms may apply. using site, agree terms use privacy policy. wikipedia® registered trademark wikimedia foundation, inc., non-profit organization. privacy policy wikipedia disclaimers contact wikipedia developers cookie statement mobile view (window.rlq=window.rlq||[]).push(function(){mw.config.set({"wgpageparsereport":{"limitreport":{"cputime":"0.316","walltime":"0.488","ppvisitednodes":{"value":2834,"limit":1000000},"ppgeneratednodes":{"value":0,"limit":1500000},"postexpandincludesize":{"value":192757,"limit":2097152},"templateargumentsize":{"value":8625,"limit":2097152},"expansiondepth":{"value":10,"limit":40},"expensivefunctioncount":{"value":3,"limit":500},"entityaccesscount":{"value":0,"limit":400},"timingprofile":["100.00% 314.070 1 -total"," 27.16% 85.288 6 template:random_portal_component"," 21.83% 68.562 10 template:navbox"," 16.86% 52.952 1 template:pp-semi-protected"," 8.24% 25.868 1 wikipedia:selected_anniversaries/april_12"," 7.98% 25.057 1 template:chronology"," 7.61% 23.915 1 template:featured_portal"," 7.26% 22.786 1 template:time_topics"," 6.76% 21.232 1 template:top_icon"," 5.76% 18.089 1 template:main_page_image"]},"scribunto":{"limitreport-timeusage":{"value":"0.100","limit":"10.000"},"limitreport-memusage":{"value":3001345,"limit":52428800}},"cachereport":{"origin":"mw1254","timestamp":"20170412175535","ttl":21600,"transientcontent":true}}});});(window.rlq=window.rlq||[]).push(function(){mw.config.set({"wgbackendresponsetime":63,"wghostname":"mw1175"});});