Planned community - Wikipedia document.documentElement.className = document.documentElement.className.replace( /(^|\s)client-nojs(\s|$)/, "$1client-js$2" ); (window.RLQ=window.RLQ||[]).push(function(){mw.config.set({"wgCanonicalNamespace":"","wgCanonicalSpecialPageName":false,"wgNamespaceNumber":0,"wgPageName":"Planned_community","wgTitle":"Planned community","wgCurRevisionId":774809956,"wgRevisionId":774809956,"wgArticleId":194841,"wgIsArticle":true,"wgIsRedirect":false,"wgAction":"view","wgUserName":null,"wgUserGroups":["*"],"wgCategories":["CS1 French-language sources (fr)","CS1 Burmese-language sources (my)","Articles Serbian-language external links","All articles dead external links","Articles dead external links July 2013","Webarchive template wayback links","Pages using ISBN magic links","All articles unsourced statements","Articles unsourced statements October 2014","Articles containing Japanese-language text","Articles lacking in-text citations October 2012","All articles lacking in-text citations","Articles unsourced statements October 2012","Articles unsourced statements August 2009","Articles unsourced statements September 2011","Articles unsourced statements March 2009","Articles unsourced statements October 2011","Articles needing additional references October 2012","All articles needing additional references","Wikipedia articles GND identifiers","Planned cities","Planned communities","New towns","Real estate"],"wgBreakFrames":false,"wgPageContentLanguage":"en","wgPageContentModel":"wikitext","wgSeparatorTransformTable":["",""],"wgDigitTransformTable":["",""],"wgDefaultDateFormat":"dmy","wgMonthNames":["","January","February","March","April","May","June","July","August","September","October","November","December"],"wgMonthNamesShort":["","Jan","Feb","Mar","Apr","May","Jun","Jul","Aug","Sep","Oct","Nov","Dec"],"wgRelevantPageName":"Planned_community","wgRelevantArticleId":194841,"wgRequestId":"WOvnhApAAEYAAjU14dMAAADK","wgIsProbablyEditable":true,"wgRestrictionEdit":[],"wgRestrictionMove":[],"wgFlaggedRevsParams":{"tags":{}},"wgStableRevisionId":null,"wgWikiEditorEnabledModules":{"toolbar":true,"dialogs":true,"preview":false,"publish":false},"wgBetaFeaturesFeatures":[],"wgMediaViewerOnClick":true,"wgMediaViewerEnabledByDefault":true,"wgPopupsShouldSendModuleToUser":false,"wgPopupsConflictsWithNavPopupGadget":false,"wgVisualEditor":{"pageLanguageCode":"en","pageLanguageDir":"ltr","usePageImages":true,"usePageDescriptions":true},"wgPreferredVariant":"en","wgMFDisplayWikibaseDescriptions":{"search":true,"nearby":true,"watchlist":true,"tagline":false},"wgRelatedArticles":null,"wgRelatedArticlesBetaFeatureEnabled":false,"wgRelatedArticlesUseCirrusSearch":true,"wgRelatedArticlesOnlyUseCirrusSearch":false,"wgULSCurrentAutonym":"English","wgNoticeProject":"wikipedia","wgCentralNoticeCookiesToDelete":[],"wgCentralNoticeCategoriesUsingLegacy":["Fundraising","fundraising"],"wgCategoryTreePageCategoryOptions":"{\"mode\":0,\"hideprefix\":20,\"showcount\":true,\"namespaces\":false}","wgWikibaseItemId":"Q1074523","wgCentralAuthMobileDomain":false,"wgVisualEditorToolbarScrollOffset":0,"wgEditSubmitButtonLabelPublish":false});mw.loader.state({"ext.globalCssJs.user.styles":"ready","ext.globalCssJs.site.styles":"ready","site.styles":"ready","noscript":"ready","user.styles":"ready","user":"ready","user.options":"loading","user.tokens":"loading","ext.cite.styles":"ready","wikibase.client.init":"ready","ext.visualEditor.desktopArticleTarget.noscript":"ready","ext.uls.interlanguage":"ready","ext.wikimediaBadges":"ready","mediawiki.legacy.shared":"ready","mediawiki.legacy.commonPrint":"ready","mediawiki.sectionAnchor":"ready","mediawiki.skinning.interface":"ready","skins.vector.styles":"ready","ext.globalCssJs.user":"ready","ext.globalCssJs.site":"ready"});mw.loader.implement("user.options@0j3lz3q",function($,jQuery,require,module){mw.user.options.set({"variant":"en"});});mw.loader.implement("user.tokens@1dqfd7l",function ( $, jQuery, require, module ) { mw.user.tokens.set({"editToken":"+\\","patrolToken":"+\\","watchToken":"+\\","csrfToken":"+\\"});/*@nomin*/; });mw.loader.load(["ext.cite.a11y","mediawiki.toc","mediawiki.action.view.postEdit","site","mediawiki.page.startup","mediawiki.user","mediawiki.hidpi","mediawiki.page.ready","mediawiki.legacy.wikibits","mediawiki.searchSuggest","ext.gadget.teahouse","ext.gadget.ReferenceTooltips","ext.gadget.watchlist-notice","ext.gadget.DRN-wizard","ext.gadget.charinsert","ext.gadget.refToolbar","ext.gadget.extra-toolbar-buttons","ext.gadget.switcher","ext.gadget.featured-articles-links","ext.centralauth.centralautologin","mmv.head","mmv.bootstrap.autostart","ext.visualEditor.desktopArticleTarget.init","ext.visualEditor.targetLoader","ext.eventLogging.subscriber","ext.wikimediaEvents","ext.navigationTiming","ext.uls.eventlogger","ext.uls.init","ext.uls.interface","ext.quicksurveys.init","ext.centralNotice.geoIP","ext.centralNotice.startUp","skins.vector.js"]);}); Planned community From Wikipedia, free encyclopedia Jump to: navigation, search For places called "New Town", see New Town. "Model city" redirects here. For US urban aid program 1960s 1970s, see Model Cities Program. Partizánske Slovakia–an example typical planned industrial city founded 1938 together shoemaking factory practically adult inhabitants city employed Abuja, FCT Nigeria, built mainly 1980s, fastest growing city world 2000 2010, increase 139.7%, still expanding rapidly[1] Brasília night ISS Plan Fredericia (Denmark) 1900 – city founded 1650 A planned community, planned city, community carefully planned inception typically constructed previously undeveloped area. This contrasts settlements evolve ad hoc fashion. Land use conflicts less frequent communities. The term new town refers planned communities new towns movement particular, mainly United Kingdom. It also common European colonization Americas build according plan either fresh ground ruins earlier Native American cities. Contents 1 Planned capital cities 2 Africa 2.1 Botswana 2.2 Equatorial Guinea 2.3 Kenya 2.4 Nigeria 2.5 South Africa 3 Asia 3.1 Burma 3.2 People's Republic China 3.3 Hong Kong 3.4 Indonesia 3.5 Iran 3.6 Israel 3.7 Japan 3.8 Malaysia 3.9 Palestinian territories 3.10 Philippines 3.11 Saudi Arabia 3.12 Singapore 3.13 South Asia 3.13.1 Ancient history 3.13.2 Medieval history 3.13.3 Modern history 3.13.3.1 Bangladesh 3.13.3.2 India 3.13.3.3 Pakistan 3.14 South Korea 3.15 Taiwan 3.16 United Arab Emirates 4 Europe 4.1 History 4.1.1 Roman Empire 4.2 Belgium 4.3 Bosnia Herzegovina 4.4 Bulgaria 4.5 Croatia 4.6 Czechoslovakia Czech Republic 4.7 Denmark 4.8 Finland 4.9 France 4.10 Germany 4.11 Greece 4.12 Hungary 4.13 Ireland 4.14 Italy 4.15 Lithuania 4.16 Macedonia 4.17 Malta 4.18 Netherlands 4.19 Norway 4.20 Poland 4.20.1 The Nobleman's Republic Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth 4.20.2 Interwar period 4.20.3 Socialist realism 4.21 Portugal 4.22 Romania 4.23 Russia 4.24 Serbia 4.25 Slovakia 4.26 Slovenia 4.27 Spain 4.28 Sweden 4.29 Turkey 4.30 Ukraine 4.31 United Kingdom 4.31.1 England Scotland 4.31.2 Northern Ireland 4.31.3 Scotland 4.31.4 Wales 5 North America 5.1 Canada 5.2 Mexico 5.3 Panama 5.4 United States 6 South America 6.1 Argentina 6.2 Brazil 6.3 Venezuela 7 Oceania 7.1 Australia 7.1.1 Adelaide 7.1.2 Melbourne 7.1.3 Canberra 7.2 New Zealand 8 See also 9 References 10 External links Planned capital cities[edit] Inner Canberra, Australia. The first entirely planned city world capital city Malta, Valletta. It planned Great Siege Malta, 1565, regulated Ufficio delle Case (Housing Office). The fortified city, previously agricultural estate, built grid-like plan. It still oldest, still habituated, planned community World.[2] Several world's capital cities planned cities, including Canberra Australia, Brasília Brazil, Belmopan Belize, New Delhi India, Abuja Nigeria, Astana Kazakhstan, Naypyidaw Burma, Islamabad Pakistan, Ankara Turkey Washington, D.C., United States. In Egypt, new capital city east Cairo proposed. The federal administrative centre Malaysia, Putrajaya, also planned city. Abu Dhabi (UAE) recently built cities Persian Gulf region also planned cities, built money oil boom. Prior boom, villages towns. Africa[edit] Botswana[edit] The city Gaborone planned constructed 1960s.[3] Equatorial Guinea[edit] In 2012, President Teodoro Obiang decided move capital new jungle site Oyala.[4] Kenya[edit] Konza Technology City planned city hoped become hub African science technology upon completion 2030.[5] Nigeria[edit] The capital, Abuja, planned city built mainly 1980s.[6] Several cities development accommodate rapidly growing population, include: Eko Atlantic City, planned city Lagos State constructed land reclaimed Atlantic Ocean. Upon completion, new city still development anticipating 250,000 residents daily flow 150,000 commuters.[7] Centenary City, Federal Capital Territory, another planned smart city development. The city designed become major tourist attraction country.[8] A list Nigerian cities neighbourhoods went form planning follows as: Abuja, one populous planned cities, fastest growing city world. Banana Island, affluent neighbourhood Ikoyi, Lagos, Lagos State Bonny Island Rivers State Centenary City Federal Capital Territory Eko Atlantic Lagos State Festac Town Lagos, Lagos State FESTAC Phase 2, next phase Festac proposed.[9] Ikeja, capital Lagos State Lekki, new city Lagos State Lekki Free Zone, free trade zone Lekki Orange Island, planned real estate development Lekki.[10] Victoria Island Lagos, Lagos State South Africa[edit] A number cities set apartheid-era variety ethnic groups. Planned settlements set white inhabitants included Welkom, Sasolburg Secunda. Additionally majority settlements South Africa planned early stages original town centres still lie grid street fashion. Some settlements also set non whites former homeland capital Bhisho.[citation needed] Asia[edit] Burma[edit] Naypyidaw (Burmese: နေပြည်တော်; MLCTS: nepranytau, officially spelled Nay Pyi Taw Naypyitaw; pronounced:[nèpjìdɔ̀]) capital Myanmar, also known Burma. It administered Naypyidaw Union Territory, per 2008 Constitution.[11] On 6 November 2005, administrative capital Burma officially moved greenfield 3.2km west Pyinmana, approximately 300km north Yangon (Rangoon), previous capital. The capital's official name announced 27 March 2006, Burmese Armed Forces Day. Much city still construction late 2012.[12] As 2009, population 925,000,[13] makes Burma's third largest city, Yangon Mandalay. People's Republic China[edit] Many ancient cities China, especially North China Plain, carefully designed according fengshui theory, featuring square rectangular city walls, rectilinear road grid, symmetrical layout. Famous examples Chang'an Tang dynasty Beijing. An exception ancient town Tekes County, Ili Kazakh Autonomous Prefecture, Xinjiang, shape ba gua. In modern China, many special economic zones developed sketch, example, Pudong, new district Shanghai. Hong Kong[edit] Southern Castle Peak, Part Tuen Mun New Town, developed 1970s onward Main article: New towns Hong Kong The area Hong Kong mountainous many places New Territories limited access roads. Hong Kong started developing new towns 1950s, accommodate rapidly growing populations. In early days term "satellite towns" used. The first new towns included Tsuen Wan Kwun Tong. Wah Fu Estate built remote corner Hong Kong Island, similar concepts smaller scale. In late 1960s 1970s, another stage new town developments launched. Nine new towns developed date. Land use carefully planned development provides plenty room public housing projects. Rail transport usually available later stage. The first towns Sha Tin, Tsuen Wan, Tuen Mun Tseung Kwan O. Tuen Mun intended self-reliant, successful beginning maintained dormitory town recent decades like new towns. More recent developments Tin Shui Wai North Lantau. The government also plans build towns Hung Shui Kiu, Ping Che-Ta Kwu Ling, Fanling North Kwu Tung North. At present, total nine new towns: Tsuen Wan New Town Sha Tin New Town Tuen Mun New Town Tai Po New Town Fanling-Sheung Shui New Town Yuen Long New Town Tseung Kwan O New Town Tin Shui Wai New Town North Lantau New Town Indonesia[edit] Further information: Indonesian future capital proposal Batavia, circa 1780. Bandung laid well-planned city, set new capital Dutch East Indies back 1920s. Batavia (predecessor modern Jakarta) planned city, modeled Dutch 17th century coastal city architecture. First, 17th century planned fortified city, crisscrossed Dutch-style canals dug regular grid. The city served administrative center Dutch East India Company. In early 19th century, Dutch colonial authority moved administrative center dilapidated unhealthy port town Old Batavia (now Kota area) several kilometres south Weltevreden area (now Central Jakarta). Old Batavia Weltevreden connected Molenvliet Canal road (now Gajah Mada Road) ran alongside waterway.[14] It well-planned community around Koningsplein, Waterlooplein Rijswijk (Jalan Veteran). The area, known Weltevreden, include Koningsplein, Rijswijk, Noordwijk, Tanah Abang, Kebon Sirih, Prapatan became popular residential, entertainment commercial district European colonial elite. Menteng, today subdistric Central Jakarta, first built well-planned community. An urban design developed 1910s set area become residential area Dutch people high officials. At time development, area first planned garden suburb colonial Batavia. Supported easy access service centers nearby central business district, area become one expensive areas residential real estate modern Jakarta. In early 20th century, Bandung planned Dutch East Indies government new capital city replace Batavia. The idea separate busy trading port commercial center (Batavia) new administrative political center (Bandung). By 1920s plan transfer capital Bandung underway. As city began laid masterplan well-planned new city, grid streets avenues laid, numbers government buildings constructed, Gedung Sate planned colonial administrative center Dutch East Indies. The plan, however, failed due Great Depression outbreak Second World War.[15] Since Palangkaraya established capital Central Kalimantan province 1957, first president Indonesia, Sukarno, outlined plan develop Palangkaraya future capital Indonesia. Palangkaraya far larger area Jakarta safe danger earthquakes volcanoes, common island Java. In late 1950s first half 1960s, Sukarno, Indonesia's first president, laid masterplan built Jakarta planned national capital Republic Indonesia. He filled Jakarta numbers monuments statues. Numbers monumental projects conceived, planned initiated administration, including Monumen Nasional, Istiqlal mosque, DPR/MPR Building, Gelora Bung Karno stadium. Sukarno also filled Jakarta nationalistic monuments statues, including Selamat Datang Monument, Pemuda Monument Senayan, Dirgantara Monument Pancoran, Irian Jaya Liberation Monument Lapangan Banteng. Although many projects completed later successor era (Suharto administration), Sukarno credited shaping Jakarta's monuments landmarks. He desired Jakarta beacon powerful new nation.[16] Because Jakarta's environmental degradation overpopulation problems, 2010s idea build new proposed capital city replace Jakarta.[17][18] Iran[edit] In period Persian Safavid Empire, Isfahan, Persian capital, built according planned scheme, consisting long boulevard planned housing green areas around it. In modern-day Iran 20 planned cities developed construction, mostly around Iran's main metropolitan areas Tehran, Isfahan, Shiraz Tabriz. Some new cities built special purposes as: Pardis, built scientific city. Poulad-Shahr, industrial city built housing Isfahan's steel industry workers. Shirin Shahr provide housing sugar industry personnel. Tehranpars built house Tehran's additional population. Shahrak-e Gharb, built massive project modern apartment buildings. Parand intended provide residences staff Imam Khomeini International Airport. Shushtar New Town built provide housing employees sugar cane processing plant. 576,000 people planned settled Iran's new towns year 2005. For list Iran's modern planned cities see: List Iran's planned cities. Israel[edit] A planned community Negev According politics country settlement number planned cities created peripheral regions. Those cities also known Development Towns. The successful Ashdod 200,000 inhabitants, port developed infrastructure. Other cities developed following Israel's lineation plan Shoham, Karmiel Arad. Modi'in-Maccabim-Re'ut another country's successful planned cities. Construction began 1994 population 80,000. Modi'in also rates higher terms average salary graduation rates national average. It designed planned Israeli architect Moshe Safdie. Many Israeli settlements follow model, including towns like Modi'in Illit Betar Illit. Japan[edit] Kyoto built grid system, starting 794. The city Kyoto developed planned city 794 new imperial capital (then called Heian-kyō), built grid layout modeled Tang dynasty capital Chang'an (modern day Xi'an), remained capital millennium. The grid layout remains, reflected major east-west streets numbered, 4th street (四条, shi-jō?). In modern times, Sapporo built 1868, following American grid plan, today fifth-largest city Japan. Both cities regular addressing systems (following grid) unlike usual subdivision-based Japanese addressing system. This section includes list references, related reading external links, sources remain unclear lacks inline citations. Please help improve section introducing precise citations. (October 2012) (Learn remove template message) Borrowing New Town movement United Kingdom, 30 new towns built Japan. Most constructions initiated period rapid economic growth 1960s, construction continued 1980s. Most located near Tokyo Kansai region. Some towns, (Senri New Town, Tama New Town) provide much employment, many residents commute nearby city. These towns fostered infamous congestion commuter trains (although metropolitan areas grown, commute become relatively short comparison commutes new urban fringe). Other New Towns act industrial/academic agglomerations (sangyo-shuseki) (Tsukuba Science City, Kashima Port Town). These areas attempt create all-inclusive environment daily living, accordance Uzō Nishiyama's "life-spheres" principle. Japan also developed concept new towns Manuel Castells Sir Peter Hall call technopolis. The technopolis program 1980s precedents New Industrial Cities Act 1960s. These cities largely modeled Tsukuba Academic New Town (Tsukuba Science City) attempt agglomerate high-tech resources together campus-like environment. In past, Japanese government proposed relocating capital planned city, plan cancelled. Overall, Japan's New Town program consists many diverse projects, focus primary function, also aspire create all-inclusive urban environment. Japan's New Town program heavily informed Anglo-American Garden City tradition, American neighborhood design, well Soviet strategies industrial development. In 2002 Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi announced end new town construction, although new towns continue receive government funding redevelopment. Sources: Ministry Construction, Japan International Cooperation Agency, City Bureau. 1975? City Planning Japan. Hein, Carola. 2003. “Visionary Plans Planners: Japanese Traditions Western Influences” Japanese Capitals Historical Perspective, Nicholas Fiévé Paul Waley, eds. New York: RoutledgeCurzon, 309–43. Scott, W. Stephen. 2006. Just Housing? Evidence Garden City Principles Postwar Japanese New Town. Undergraduate diss. New College Florida. Malaysia[edit] See entries Mines Wellness City, Shah Alam, Putrajaya, Cyberjaya, Petaling Jaya(New Town) Multimedia Super Corridor. Kulim Hi-Tech Park See entries Nusajaya Iskandar Malaysia Palestinian territories[edit] Rawabi Philippines[edit] Quezon City planned city President Manuel L. Quezon, earlier proposed new city built land northeast City Manila. Carefully planned districts include Santa Mesa Heights (part original Burnham Plan Manila), Diliman Estate (includes University Philippines), New Manila, Cubao Commercial District, South Triangle, Housing Projects 1 (Roxas District), 2 3 (Quirino District), 4, 5 (Kamias-Kamuning District), 6, 7, 8. President Elpidio Quirino proclaimed Quezon City national capital July 17, 1948, President Ferdinand Marcos restoring Manila capital June 24, 1976. He created metropolitan area called Metro Manila, remains congested today due failed execution Quezon City plan well Burnham Plan. Other planned cities (in order foundation): Baguio Trece Martires, Cavite Island Garden City Samal Palayan, Nueva Ecija Saudi Arabia[edit] King Abdullah Economic City, future planned city along Red Sea located Saudi Arabia. In 1975, Jubail Industrial City, also known Jubail, designated new industrial city Saudi government. It provides 50% country's drinking water desalination water Persian Gulf. Singapore[edit] Main article: New towns Singapore The new town planning concept introduced Singapore building first New Town, Queenstown, July 1952 1973 country's public housing authority, Housing Development Board. Today, vast majority approximately 11,000 public housing buildings organised 22 new towns across country. Each new town designed completely self-sustainable. Helmed hierarchy commercial developments, ranging town centre precinct-level outlets, need venture town meet common needs residences. Employment found industrial estates located within several towns. Educational, health care, recreational needs also taken care provision schools, hospitals, parks, sports complexes, on. Singapore's expertise successful new town design internationally recognised Building Social Housing Foundation (BSHF) United Nations awarded World Habitat Award Tampines New Town, selected representative Singapore's new towns, 5 October 1992.[19] South Asia[edit] Ancient history[edit] An urban culture evident mature phase Indus Valley Civilization thrived present-day Pakistan north western India around 3300 BC. The quality municipal city planning suggests knowledge urban planning efficient municipal governments placed high priority hygiene. The streets major cities present-day Pakistan Mohenjo-daro Harappa, world's earliest planned cities, laid perfect grid pattern comparable present-day New York City. The houses protected noise, odours, thieves. As seen ancient sites Harappa Mohenjo-daro Pakistan western border India, urban plan included world's first urban sanitation systems. Within city, individual homes groups homes obtained water wells. From room appears set aside bathing, waste water directed covered drains, lined major streets. Houses opened inner courtyards smaller lanes. The ancient Indus systems sewage drainage developed used cities throughout Indus Valley far advanced found contemporary urban sites Middle East even efficient areas modern South Asia today. The advanced architecture Harappans shown dockyards, granaries, warehouses, brick platforms, protective walls. Medieval history[edit] A number medieval Indian cities planned including: Ahmedabad Gujarat. Established Sultan Ahmad Shah 1411. Jaipur Rajasthan. Established 1727 Maharaja Sawai Jai Singh II.It capital Rajasthan state India. Udaipur Rajasthan. It historic capital former kingdom Mewar. Madurai, state Tamil Nadu. It capital erstwhile Pandyan kingdom noted lotus-like symmetry. Fatehpur Sikri Agra. Its planning done Mughal emperor Akbar Great. Vijayanagar Karnataka, capital erstwhile Vijayanagara Empire. Hampi Karnataka, former capital Vijayanagara Empire prior city Vijayanagar. Modern history[edit] Bangladesh[edit] All except last one satellites Dhaka, Bangladesh's capital. Dhanmondi Gulshan Banani Baridhara Uttara Model Town Banasree Bashundhara Niketon Motijheel Dilkusha (central business district) Tejgaon (an industrial area) Kawran Bazar (a commercial hub) Khilgaon Mirpur Purbachal New Town (will capital Bangladesh under-construction) India[edit] The period following independence saw India defined smaller geographical regions. New states Gujarat formed planned capital cities. The major planned cities India include: Navi Mumbai, World's largest planned city. Contains population 2.6 million.[20][21] Gurgaon Manesar (Gurgaon) New Gurgaon Rajarhat (New Town, Kolkata), beautiful planned township near Kolkata New Delhi NOIDA Chandigarh India's first planned city Durgapur India's second planned city Visakhapatnam Gandhinagar Patiala Panchkula Mohali Greater Noida Lavasa Udaipur Auroville Bhubaneshwar, capital Odisha Rourkela Bokaro Steel City Dispur Dhule, Maharashtra, city planned renowned architect India, Sir Vishveshwarayya. Naya Raipur, upcoming capital Chhattisgarh Amaravati, new city planned become capital Andhra Pradesh Bidhannagar, Kolkata(Salt Lake City), planned township near Kolkata Kalyani Jamshedpur, planned township Jharkhand Bhilai, planned township Chhattisgarh Pimpri-Chinchwad Solapur, planned drainage city Pakistan[edit] Islamabad, whose first foundations laid 1950s.[22][23] Jauharabad- planned town situated Khushab District, Punjab, Pakistan.[24] Sargodha Established British Air Defence Faisalabad Established British later Ayub Khan Industry Gwadar Established government southern leg China–Pakistan Economic Corridor Sahiwal LDA City DCK Bahria Town's Karachi, Lahore Rawalpindi privately developed towns. Clifton DHA Karachi DHA Lahore South Korea[edit] New Songdo City planned international business centre developed 6 square kilometres reclaimed land along Incheon's waterfront, 65 kilometres west Seoul connected Incheon International Airport 10 kilometre highway bridge. This 10-year development project estimated cost excess $40 billion, making largest private development project ever undertaken anywhere world. Gwanggyo newtown located 25km south away Seoul Suwon city Youngin city, Gyeonggi province. Gwanggyo newtown area 11 square kilometers designated 2004 Gyeonggi Province, Suwon city, Youngin city, Gyeonggi Development Corporation(GICO). It accommodate 31,000 households. Gwanggyo newtown housing supply also several regional goals provincial office movement, convention center building, creating economic growth core Gyeonggi provincial area. Its infrastructure scheduled constructed 2012. Since 1990s, several planned communities built Seoul Metropolitan Area alleviate housing demands Seoul. They include: Several ongoing developments Hwaseong, including Bongdam, Dongtan, Hyangnam Bundang, Seongnam City Ilsan, Goyang City Pangyo, Seongnam City Since 2007 Sejong City planned new capital becoming research hub instead many national research institutes moving 2013 2015. It 0.8 million planned population, largest new town development plan ever. Taiwan[edit] Zhongxing Xincun, Nantou County Linkou District, New Taipei—Guishan District, Taoyuan City (Linkou New Town, 林口新市鎮) Danhai, Tamsui District, New Taipei (Danhai New Town, 淡海新市鎮) I-da (I-da World, 義大) United Arab Emirates[edit] Capital city Abu Dhabi, planned city extent Certain new parts Dubai, planned Masdar City, conceived mixed purpose residential commercial area Europe[edit] History[edit] New settlements planned Europe least since Greek antiquity (see article Urban planning). The Greeks built new colonial cities around Mediterranean. The ancient Romans also founded many new colonial towns empire. There are, however, also traces planned settlements non-Roman origin pre-historic northern Europe. Most planned settlements medieval Europe created period 12th 14th centuries. All kinds landlords, highest lowest rank, tried found new villages towns estates, order gain economical, political military power. The settlers generally attracted fiscal, economical juridical advantages granted founding lord, forced move elsewhere estates. Most new towns remain rather small (as instance bastides southwestern France), became important cities, Cardiff, Leeds, ‘s-Hertogenbosch, Montauban, Bilbao, Malmö, Lübeck, Munich, Berlin, Bern, Klagenfurt, Alessandria, Warsaw Sarajevo.[25] Roman Empire[edit] The Romans built large number towns throughout empire, often colonies settlement citizens veterans. These generally characterised grid streets planned water-supply; many modern European towns originally Roman foundation still retain part original street-grid. Belgium[edit] Louvain-la-Neuve, built Université Catholique de Louvain. Bosnia Herzegovina[edit] Slobomir new town Bosnia Herzegovina name means: "the city freedom peace". It located Drina river near Bijeljina. It founded Slobodan Pavlović, Bosnian philanthropist. It aims one major cities post-war Bosnia Herzegovina. In fact, city located two countries, Bosnia Herzegovina Serbia, although majority Bosnia Herzegovina. The city named founder, Slobodan Pavlović, wife, Mira. Andrićgrad town construction famous Serbian director Emir Kusturica, located Višegrad, Republika Srpska.[26] Bulgaria[edit] The cities Stara Zagora Kazanlak, central Bulgaria, rebuilt planned cities burnt ground 1877–1878 Russia-Turkey War. Also city Dimitrovgrad south Bulgaria, planned key industrial infrastructure center. Croatia[edit] Červar-Porat resort town western Croatia, located east coast Adriatic Sea Červar lagoon. It built planned town 1970s, although area inhabited Roman times. During War Independence used camp refugees Bosnia Herzegovina Vukovar. It planned house 6500 people.[citation needed] Raša Istria built "new town" 1936–1937 part Mussolini's urban colonization Istria Italian territories. The capital Zagreb underwent major expansion 1960s. By time, city's official boundary river Sava, since nothing built it. After flood 1960s, many residents moved districts created residents, Dubrava, interconnection Zagreb's old part Sesvete. During 1960s 1970s, planned part Zagreb, Novi Zagreb (New Zagreb), constructed, lied other, uninhabited part river Sava, one major districts consisting purely residential buildings blocks. It still expansion new landmarks built it, famous one recent one, Arena Zagreb, built 2008. Czechoslovakia Czech Republic[edit] Poruba Havířov established 1950s new satellite residential towns workers coal-mining, steel-mill heavy-industry complex Ostrava region.[citation needed] Prague extended large housing estates – "new towns" 1970s 1980s: Severní Město (Northern Town), Jižní Město (Southern Town), Jihozápadní Město (South-Western Town) largest, population around 100.000 each. Their remote position city centre compensated underground lines constructed usually decade completion housing projects.[citation needed] Denmark[edit] Fredericia designed combination town military fortress following devastation caused Thirty Years' War. A recent example Ørestad, planned built strengthen development Copenhagen/Malmö region. The suburb Albertslund also built scratch 1970s, merging two villages Vridsløselille Herstedvester. Finland[edit] The city Helsinki, previously town 5,000 inhabitants, made capital new Grand Duchy Finland 1812 decree Alexander I, Emperor Russia. The city center rebuilt lead German architect Carl Ludvig Engel. However, last city Finland ordered built previously completely uninhabited land Raahe, founded governor general Per Brahe Younger 1649. Finland also various "ekokylä" communities "ecological villages". For example, Tapiola post-war garden city edge Espoo. The city Vaasa rebuilt seven kilometers northwest original location 1862, fire destroyed city 1852. The new town planned Carl Axel Setterberg. The disastrous consequences fire considered design included five broad avenues divided town sections block divided alleys. Hamina old Finnish Eastern trade capital, founded Swedish reign. The star-shaped fortress circular town plan based Italian Renaissance fortress concept 16th century. France[edit] Many new cities, called bastides, founded 12th 14th centuries southwestern France, Hundred Years War took place, order replace destroyed cities organize defence growth. Among those, Monpazier, Beaumont, Villeréal good examples. In 1517, construction Le Havre ordered Francis I France new port. It completely destroyed Second World War entirely rebuilt modernist style, Trente Glorieuses, thirty-year period 1945 1975. Cardinal Richelieu founded small Baroque town Richelieu, remains largely unchanged. A program new towns (French ville nouvelle) developed mid-1960s try control expansion cities. Nine villes nouvelles created. Near Paris: Cergy-Pontoise, Marne-la-Vallée, Sénart (former Melun-Sénart), Évry, Saint-Quentin-en-Yvelines Near Lille: Villeneuve d'Ascq (Former Lille-Est) Near Lyon: L'Isle-d'Abeau Near Marseille: Rives de l'Etang de Berre Near Rouen: Val-de-Reuil Near Grenoble: L'Isle-d'Abeau La Défense, greater Paris area, could also considered planned town, though built successive stages beginning 1950s. Germany[edit] Planned cities Germany are: Bayreuth: example medieval new city Bremerhaven: founded seaport 19th century Berlin – Friedrichstadt Eisenhüttenstadt: "first socialist town" Germany Freudenstadt: roads follow layout Nine Men's Morris game Glückstadt: founded 1617 Duke Holstein, King Christian IV Denmark Halle-Neustadt: "Stadtteil" borough Halle, Saxony-Anhalt Hellerau: first German garden city founded 1909, today part Dresden Karlsruhe: roads follow layout hand-held fan castle juncture Ludwigsburg: planned new capital duke Württemberg Mannheim Quadratestadt: squares named like ranks files chessboard Munich Maxvorstadt: first planned city expansion Munich realized 1805 1810 according raster Neu-Isenburg: founded 1699 town exiles french Huguenots Neustrelitz: founded 1733 streets spreading octagonal market place Neuwied: founded 1653 Putbus: built around circular centre radially aligned streets Sennestadt: founded 1956, today part Bielefeld Wilhelmshaven: founded naval base Kingdom Prussia Wolfsburg: founded 1938 host factories newly built Volkswagen Welthauptstadt Germania projected renewal Berlin planned city, although small portion constructed 1937 1943. After World War II, several expellee towns built like Espelkamp, Neutraubling Traunreut. Greece[edit] Planned cities Greece are: Lakki: planned built 1930s Italians house members military stationed island Leros; initial name Portolago Nea Alikarnassos: founded 1925 house Greek refugees Orestiada: founded 1922 house Greek refugees Paralia Distomou: planned built house workers Aluminium Greece Sparta: planned built 1834 decree issued Otto Greece Hungary[edit] All Hungarian planned cities built second half 20th century program rapid industrialization implemented communist government. The Akadémiaújtelep area Budapest designed unique geometrical fashion. Dunaújváros, built next existing village Dunapentele provide housing workers large steel factory complex. Once named Stalin, city maintains importance heavy industry even recession following end Communist era. Tiszaújváros, built next existing village Tiszaszederkény named Lenin decades. A significant chemical factory built simultaneously. Kazincbarcika, created villages Sajókazinc, Barcika Berente (the latter become independent since then) mining area. The city population grew fast founding factory. Tatabánya, created four already existing villages developed mining town industrial centre shortly elevation town status became county seat county, status still maintains despite presence historically significant towns area. Beloiannisz (although town, village) planned built 1950s provide home Greek refugees Civil War. Ireland[edit] In Republic Ireland, United Kingdom, term "new town" often used refer planned towns built World War II discussed early 1941. The term "new town" Ireland also used earlier developments, notably Georgian era. Part Limerick city built planned fashion "Newtown Pery". In 1961 first new town Shannon commenced target 6,000 inhabitants set. This since exceeded. Shannon regional importance today economic centre (with Shannon Free Zone Shannon Airport), recently failed expand population anticipated. Since late 1990s, particularly early 2000s, population expanding much faster rate, town rejuvenation, new retail entertainment facilities many new housing developments. It 1967 Wright Report planned four towns County Dublin. These Blanchardstown, Clondalkin, Lucan Tallaght actuality reduced Blanchardstown, Lucan-Clondalkin Tallaght. Each towns approximately 50,000 inhabitants today. The recent new town Ireland Adamstown County Dublin. Building commenced 2005 anticipated occupation commence late 2006 main development 10,500 units completed within ten-year timescale. Palmanova, Italy, founded 16th century. Italy[edit] In past centuries several new towns planned Italy. One famous Pienza, close Siena, Renaissance city, also called The Ideal Town Utopia Town. Between 1459 1462 famous architects Italy worked Pope Pius II built city centre small town. Another example renaissance planned cities walled star city Palmanova. It derivative ideal circular cities, notable Filarete's imaginary Sforzinda. In early 20th century, fascist government Benito Mussolini, many new cities founded, prominent Littoria (renamed Latina fall Fascism). The city inaugurated December 18, 1932. Littoria populated immigrants coming Northern Italy, mainly Friuli Veneto. The great Sicilian earthquake 1693 forced complete rebuilding new plans many towns. Other well known new cities located close Milan metropolitan area. Crespi d'Adda, kilometres east Milan along Adda River, settled Crespi family. It first Ideal Worker's City Italy, built close cotton factory. Today Crespi d'Adda part Unesco World Heritage List. Cusano Milanino settled first years 20th century formerly small town Cusano. It built new green city, rich parks, villas, large boulevards called Milanino (Little Milan). In 1970s eastern metropolitan area Milan new city built Silvio Berlusconi. It called Milano Due. It garden city designed families upper middle class, peculiarity pedestrian paths completely free traffic. In 1980s another two similar cities built Berlusconi, Milano 3 Milano Visconti. Each around 12,000 inhabitants. Lithuania[edit] In 1961 Elektrėnai established planned city workers Elektrėnai Power Plant 1975 Visaginas established planned city workers Ignalina Nuclear Power Plant. Macedonia[edit] The graphical scheme Detailed Urbanist Plan settlement within Municipality Aerodrom within City Skopje, Republic Macedonia. The Municipality Aerodrom within City Skopje planned community. Malta[edit] The fortified cities Senglea Valletta built grid plan Knights Malta 16th century. The town Paola, also known Raħal Ġdid (New Town), built grid plan Grand Master Antoine de Paule. The towns San Ġwann Santa Luċija built planned cities 1960s 1970s Netherlands[edit] One province Netherlands, Flevoland (pop. 370,000 (2006)), reclaimed Zuiderzee (Southern Sea). After flood 1916, decided Zuiderzee, inland sea within Netherlands, would closed reclaimed. In 1932, causeway (the Afsluitdijk) completed, closed sea completely. The Zuiderzee subsequently called IJsselmeer (IJssel-lake) previously salty water became fresh. The first part new lake reclaimed Noordoostpolder (Northeast polder). This new land included, among others, former island Urk included province Overijssel. After this, parts also reclaimed: eastern part 1957 (Oost-Flevoland) southern part (Zuid-Flevoland) 1968. The municipalities three parts voted become separate province, happened 1986. The capital Flevoland Lelystad, biggest city Almere (pop. 183,500 February 2008). Apart two larger cities, several 'New Villages' built. In Noordoostpolder central town Emmeloord surrounded ten villages, cycling distance Emmeloord since popular way transport 1940s (and it's still popular). Most noteworthy villages Nagele designed famous modern architects time, Gerrit Rietveld, Aldo van Eyck, Willem Wissing Jaap Bakema among them. The villages built traditional/vernacular style. In recent Flevolandpolders four 'New Villages' built. Initially villages planned, introduction cars made fewer larger villages possible. New towns outside Flevoland Hoofddorp IJmuiden near Amsterdam, Hellevoetsluis Spijkenisse near Rotterdam navy port Den Helder. The cities Almere, Capelle aan den IJssel, Haarlemmermeer (also reclaimed polder, 19th century), Nieuwegein, Purmerend Zoetermeer members European New Town Platform. Norway[edit] Oslo: After great fire 1624, decided King Christian IV city would moved behind Akershus fortress. The new town, named Christiania, laid grid downtown area known "Kvadraturen" (the Quadrature). The original town Oslo later incorporated Christiania, neighborhood eastern Oslo; Gamlebyen "The Old City". The city Kristiansand formally founded 1641 King Christian IV. The city granted trade privileges southern coast Norway, denying towns trade foreign states. As Oslo/Christiania it, city behind fortress, grid system allowing cannons fire towards two ports city river eastern end. Poland[edit] Four cities stand examples planned communities Poland: Zamość, Gdynia, Tychy Nowa Huta. Their diverse layouts result different aesthetics held ideal development planned communities. Planned cities Poland long history fall primarily three time periods planned towns developed Poland neighbors comprised Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth. These Nobleman's Republic (16th 18th centuries), interwar period (1918–1939) Socialist Realism (1944–1956). The Nobleman's Republic Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth[edit] See also: Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth The extreme opulence Poland's nobility enjoyed Renaissance left Poland's elites obscene amounts money spend, also motivated find new ways invest hefty fortunes grasp Royal Treasury. Jan Zamoyski founded city Zamość order circumvent royal tariffs duties also serving capital mini-state. Zamość planned renowned Paduan architect Bernardo Morando modeled Renaissance theories 'ideal city'. Realizing importance trade, Zamoyski issued special location charters representatives peoples traditionally engaged trade, i.e. Greeks, Armenians Sephardic Jews secured exemptions taxes, customs duties tolls, contributed fast development. Zamoyski's success Zamość spawned numerous Polish nobles found "private" cities Białystok many towns survive today, Zamość added UN World Heritage list 1992 today considered one precious urban complexes Europe world.[citation needed] Interwar period[edit] See also: History Poland (1918-1939) The preeminent example planned community interwar Poland Gdynia. After World War I Poland regained independence lacked commercial seaport (De iure Poles could use Gdańsk, main port country War today, de facto Germans residing city made almost impossible them), making necessary build one scratch. The extensive modern seaport facilities Gdynia, modern extensive port facilities Europe time, became Poland's central port Baltic Sea. In shadow port, city took shape mirroring scope rapid development 19th-century Chicago, growing small fishing village 1,300 1921 full blown city population 126,000 less 20 years later. The Central Business District developed Gdynia showcase Art Deco Modernist architectural styles predominate much cityscape. There also villas, particularly city's villa districts Kamienna Góra Historicism inspired Neo-Renaissance Neo-Baroque architecture. Socialist realism[edit] See also: History Poland (1945–1989) After destruction Polish cities World War II, Communist regime took power Poland sought bring architecture line vision society. Thus urban complexes arose reflected ideals socialist realism. This seen districts Polish cities Warsaw's MDM. The City Nowa Huta (now district Kraków) Tychy built epitome proletarian future Poland. Portugal[edit] Vila Real de Santo António built 1755 Lisbon earthquake, model used rebuilding Lisbon, Portugal's capital city (also destroyed earthquake), similar orthogonal plan. Romania[edit] The cities Brăila, Giurgiu Turnu Severin rebuilt, according new plans, first part 19th century cities Alexandria Călărași built completely new time. The city Victoria, located Braşov County, built communist government beginning second half 20th century. Russia[edit] Saint Petersburg built Peter Great planned capital city starting 1703. Magnitogorsk example planned industrial city based Stalin's 1930s five-year plans. The Avtozavodsky district Tolyatti planned industrial city Soviet post-war modernism. Serbia[edit] Novi Beograd, meaning New Belgrade Serbian, municipality city Belgrade, built previously undeveloped area left bank Sava river. The first development began 1947, municipality since expanded significantly become fastest developing region Serbia. Drvengrad, meaning Wooden Town Serbian, traditional village Serbian film director Emir Kusturica built film Life Is Miracle. It located Zlatibor District near city Užice, two hundred kilometers southwest Serbia's capital, Belgrade. It located near Mokra Gora Višegrad. Slovakia[edit] Partizánske established 1938–1939, Jan Antonín Baťa Zlín, Czechoslovakia (now Czech Republic) powerful network companies built shoe factory cadastral area Šimonovany municipality. The newly created settlement workers carried name Baťovany part Šimonovany. With growth factory, grew settlement. The whole municipality renamed Baťovany 1948 given town status. As sign recognition local inhabitants fighting Slovak National Uprising, town renamed Partizánske 9 February 1949.[27] Svit established 1934 business industrialist Jan Antonín Baťa Zlín, Czechoslovakia (now Czech Republic) accordance policy setting villages around country workers. Slovenia[edit] Nova Gorica, built 1947 immediately east new border Italy, town Gorizia remained. Spain[edit] During 16th 17th centuries, population Spain declined due emigration Americas later kings governments made efforts repopulate country. In second half 18th century, King Charles III implemented so-called New Settlements (Nuevas Poblaciones) plan would bring 10,000 immigrants central Europe region Sierra Morena. Pablo de Olavide appointed superintendent forty new settlements established notable La Carolina, perfectly rectangular grid design.[28] Later kings repopulation efforts led creation settlements, also rectangular grid plans. One town La Isabela (40.4295 N, 2.6876 W), disappeared 1950s submerged waters newly created artificial lake Buendía still visible water satellite imagery. Under Francisco Franco, Instituto Nacional de Colonización (National Institute Colonization) built great number towns villages. Tres Cantos, near Madrid, good example successful new town design Spain. It built 1970s. Newer additional sections large cities often newly planned case Salamanca district Ciudad Lineal Madrid Eixample Barcelona. Sweden[edit] Gothenburg planned built major fortified city nothing 1621. Karlskrona also planned built major city naval base nothing, beginning 1680. Vällingby, suburb, example new town Sweden 1950. Kiruna built large mine, 1898. Arvika also planned city. Turkey[edit] Some parts biggest city, Istanbul, re-developed re-planned.[29] The capital, Ankara, built plan constantly re-planned.[30] Atça, Aydın burned Greek forces Turkish Independence War. The rebuilding plan based Paris' plan.[31] Some cities including; Erzincan, Karabük, Kars, Kayseri, Konya also planned. Ukraine[edit] Odesa built planned city according 18th-century plans Flemish engineer Franz de Wollant (also known François Sainte de Wollant).[32] The engineer also planned following municipalities Ukraine late 18th century: Voznesensk (Ukrainian: Вознесенськ), Mykolayiv Oblast Ovidiopol (Ukrainian: Овідіополь), Odesa Oblast Horishni Plavni, founded 1960 Komsomolsk, prosperous planned city Ukraine, depending internationally important iron ore mining business. Prypiat another new city Ukraine built 1970. The city abandoned April 27, 1986 Chernobyl nuclear disaster. On April 26 city 50,000 habitants, majority working Chernobyl nuclear power plant. Now abandoned town highly contaminated radiation. Most Prypiat's former inhabitants resettled Slavutych planned built purpose. United Kingdom[edit] Main articles: New towns United Kingdom, New towns movement, Town country planning United Kingdom England Scotland[edit] The Romans planned many towns Britain, settlements changed recognition subsequent centuries. The town Winchelsea said first post-Roman new town Britain, constructed grid system instructions King Edward I 1280, largely completed 1292. Another claimant title Salisbury, established early 13th century Bishop Sarum. The best known pre-20th-century new town UK undoubtedly Edinburgh New Town, built accordance 1766 master plan James Craig, (along Bath Dublin) archetype elegant Georgian style British architecture. The term "new town" often refers UK towns built World War II New Towns Act 1946. These influenced garden city movement, launched around 1900 Ebenezer Howard Sir Patrick Geddes work Raymond Unwin, manifested Letchworth Garden City Welwyn Garden City Hertfordshire. Following World War II, 28 projected towns designated New Towns 1946 Act, developed partly house large numbers people whose homes destroyed bombing war partly move parts population (mainly Victorian) urban slums. New Towns policy also informed series wartime commissions, including:[citation needed] Barlow Commission (1940) distribution industrial population, Scott Committee rural land use (1941) Uthwatt Committee compensation betterment (1942) (later) Reith Report New Towns (1947). Also crucial thinking Abercrombie Plan London (1944), envisaged moving million half people London new expanded towns. A similar plan developed Clyde Valley 1946 combat similar problems faced Glasgow. Together committees reflected strong consensus halt uncontrolled sprawl London large cities. For some, consensus tied concern social welfare reform (typified Beveridge Report), typified motto build better, live better; others, John Betjeman conservative objection changing character existing towns. Following building Borehamwood, Middlesex, 12 miles north-west central London, first ring major "first generation" New Towns around London (1946) Stevenage, Hertfordshire, 27 miles north London, Basildon, Essex, 25 miles east London along River Thames. Hertfordshire built four new towns, two vicinity Stevenage (Welwyn Garden City Hatfield), third north called Letchworth, Hemel Hempstead west. (Hall 1996: 133) New Towns North East also planned Newton Aycliffe (which social reformer government adviser William Beveridge wanted "ideal town live in") Peterlee. Two new towns also planned Scotland East Kilbride (1947) Glenrothes (1948). Bracknell Berkshire, south-west London, designated New Town 1949 still expanding. Other London new towns era include Harlow Essex Crawley West Sussex. Later scatter "second-generation" towns built meet specific problems, development Corby Steelworks. Finally, five "third-generation" towns launched late 1960s: larger, based substantial existing settlements Peterborough, famous probably Milton Keynes, midway London Birmingham, known huge central park shopping centre, designed outset new city – though law 'New Town'. The 1960s saw new towns crop around England's second-city Birmingham, namely Redditch, Tamworth Telford. Other towns, Ashford Kent, Basingstoke Hampshire Swindon Wiltshire, designated "Expanded Towns" share many characteristics new towns. Scotland also gained three new towns: Cumbernauld 1956, famous enclosed 'town centre', Livingston (1962) Irvine (1966).[33] In spite relative success new towns London Metropolitan green belt, London continued suffer chronic housing shortage, especially south-east. Another small New Town, Thamesmead, developed adjacent Thames early 1960s suffered poor transport links. Some improvement infrastructure seen subsequently. All new towns featured car-oriented layout many roundabouts grid-based road system unusual old world. Milton Keynes particular designed grid-based distributor road system. The earlier new towns, construction often rushed whose inhabitants generally plucked established communities little ceremony, rapidly got poor press reputation home "new town blues".[citation needed] These issues systematically addressed later towns, third generation towns particular devoting substantial resources cycle routes,[34] public transport community facilities, well employing teams officers social development work.[citation needed] The financing UK new towns creative. Land within designated area acquired agricultural use value development corporation town, infrastructure building funds borrowed 60-year terms UK Treasury. Interest loans rolled up, expectation growth land values caused development town would eventually allow loans repaid full. However, high levels retail price inflation experienced developed world 1970s 1980s fed interest rates frustrated expectation, substantial parts loans ultimately written off.[citation needed] All New Towns designated New Towns Act 1946 serviced secretariat, New Towns Association, quango reported New Towns Directorate Department Environment. It coordinated work General Managers technical officers, published monthly information bulletin provided information visitors around world. As New Town reached maturity, town's assets taken Commission New Towns. Set 1948, New Towns Association dissolved 1998. All papers held Commission New Towns held The National archives:[35] From 1970s first generation towns began reach initial growth targets. As so, development corporations wound assets disposed of: rented housing local authority, assets Commission New Towns (in England; alternative arrangements made Scotland Wales). The Thatcher Government, 1979, saw new towns socialist experiment discontinued, development corporations dissolved 1992 (with closure Milton Keynes Development Corporation), even third generation towns whose growth targets still far achieved. Ultimately Commission New Towns also dissolved assets – still including lot undeveloped land – passed English Industrial Estates Corporation (later known English Partnerships). Many New Towns attempted incorporate public art cultural programmes mixed methods results. In Harlow architect charge design new town, Frederick Gibberd, founded Harlow Art Trust[36] used purchase works leading sculptors, including Auguste Rodin, Henry Moore Barbara Hepworth. In Peterlee abstract artist Victor Pasmore appointed part design team, led building Apollo Pavilion. Washington New Town provided community theatre art gallery. The public art Milton Keynes includes (in)famous Concrete Cows, resulted work 'artist residence' gone become recognised landmark. Glenrothes led way Scotland first new town appoint town artist 1968. A massive range artworks (around 132 total) ranging concrete hippos bronze statues, dancing children, giant flowers, dinosaur, horse chariot crocodiles, name few, created. Town artists appointed Glenrothes include David Harding[37] Malcolm Robertson.[38] In 1990s, experimental "new town" developed Prince Wales use traditional vernacular architectural styles started Poundbury Dorset. Northern Ireland[edit] In Northern Ireland, building Craigavon County Armagh commenced 1966 Lurgan Portadown, although entire blocks flats shops lay empty, later derelict, eventually bulldozed. The area, population exceeding 80,000 mostly dormitory town Belfast. Derry first ever planned city Ireland (the city located Northern Ireland). Work began building new city across River Foyle ancient town Derry (Doire Cholm Chille Doire) 1613. The walls actually completed five years later 1618. The central diamond within walled city four gates thought good design defence.[39] In 1963 Matthew Plan new city Craigavon founded original towns Portadown Lurgan. This town today lies mostly incomplete troubles halted construction. The plan initially construct relief settlement take people crowded city Belfast. Scotland[edit] In late 1950s early 1960s Scotland saw creation several "post-war new towns". These were; Cumbernauld, East Kilbride, Glenrothes, Irvine Livingston. Each towns Scotland's list 20 populated towns cities. East Kilbride second largest town Scotland, 6th largest settlement population 73,000 Livingston population 76,000. The three towns big populations 30,000 50,000. Wales[edit] The new towns Wales Newtown Cwmbran. Cwmbran established provide new employment south eastern portion South Wales Coalfield. The town perhaps widely known international sports stadium shopping centre.[citation needed] North America[edit] Canada[edit] When Prime Minister Sir John A. Macdonald began settle West Canada, put project command Canadian Pacific Railway (CPR). The CPR exercised complete control development land ownership. The federal government granted every second square mile section (totalling 101,000km²) along proposed railway line route CPR. The CPR decided place railway stations, thus would decide dominant town area would be. In instances CPR would build station empty section land make largest profit land sales — meaning CPR founded many Canadian West's towns, Medicine Hat Moose Jaw, scratch. If existing town close newly constructed station land owned CPR, town forced move new site reconstruct itself, essentially building new town. Calgary Yorkton, Saskatchewan, among towns move themselves.[citation needed] After CPR established station particular site, would plan town would constructed. The side tracks station would go business, side would go warehouses. Furthermore, CPR controlled major buildings went (by giving town free land build CPR wanted go), construction roads placement organization class-structured residential areas. The CPR's influence development Canadian west's communities one earliest examples new town construction modern world. Later influences planned community development Canada exploitation mineral forest wealth, usually remote locations vast country. Among numerous company towns planned built purposes Corner Brook Grand Falls Newfoundland, Témiscaming Fermont Quebec. In modern suburban context, several "New Towns" established suburbs large cities. Early examples include Leaside Toronto Mount Royal Montreal. Both planned developed Canadian Northern Railway middle class suburbs, though both, Leaside particular, featured large industrial tracts. Leaside municipal government 1967, Mount Royal continues enjoy autonomy City Montreal.[citation needed] In post-war period, new corporate new towns developed. Bramalea, located Brampton, Ontario Erin Mills, located Mississauga, Ontario, developed phases. Both included residential, commercial industrial components. Development Erin Mills continues day. More recently, Cornell development Markham, Ontario, built new town, using concepts New Urbanism. Mexico[edit] Tenochtitlan capital Aztec empire, built island Lake Texcoco Federal District central Mexico. The city largely destroyed 1520s Spanish conquistadores. Mexico City erected top ruins and, ensuing centuries, Lake Texcoco gradually drained. Puebla built need Spanish settlement route Mexico City port Veracruz. Panama[edit] Although Panama City planned, certain areas Costa del Este, exclusive high density residential business area, close downtown Panama City. The project combines many skyscrapers beautiful green areas, close highway connects city center. Other planned areas, lesser degree, Punta Pacifica former Canal Zone. United States[edit] The original plan Memphis, Tennessee, surveyed 1819 In colonial history United States, first planned community St. Augustine, planned 1565. The earliest towns English-speaking America Jamestown rudimentary elements planning. The first comprehensively planned town Charles Town (later Charleston, South Carolina), founded 1670, planned 1672, relocated 1680. Later planned cities Philadelphia, 1682; Albany, 1695; Williamsburg, 1699; Annapolis, 1718; New York 1731 (redesigned British);and Savannah, 1733; New Haven, 1748 (with early plan dated 1638); Alexandria, 1749.[40] The national capital (Washington, D.C.), several state capitals (Jackson, Mississippi; Columbus, Ohio; Indianapolis, Indiana; Raleigh, North Carolina; Columbia, South Carolina; Madison, Wisconsin; Salt Lake City, Utah; Tallahassee, Florida; Austin, Texas) essentially carved wilderness serve capital cities. Pullman, incorporated Chicago's South Side, world-renowned company town founded industrialist George M. Pullman 1880s. In Beaver County, Pennsylvania, near Pittsburgh, American Bridge Company founded Ambridge, Pennsylvania 1905 company town American Bridge; American Bridge still based near Ambridge today nearby Coraopolis, Pennsylvania. Another well known company town Gary, Indiana, founded 1906 United States Steel Corporation home new steel mill, Gary Works, named Elbert Henry Gary, chairman company. For many years Gary Works largest steel mill world, dominated town, main entrance northern end Broadway, city's main thoroughfare. The fortunes planned city historically risen fallen steel mill: prosperous 1930s, city lost 55 percent population since 1960. Riverside, Illinois, Radburn, New Jersey, Kansas City, Missouri's Country Club District early examples planned communities. Established 1912, Shaker Heights, Ohio, planned developed Van Sweringen brothers, railroad moguls envisioned community suburban retreat industrial inner-city Cleveland.[41] Kohler Company created planned village name west company's former headquarters city Sheboygan, Wisconsin, incorporated 1912. In 1918, Aluminum Company America built town Alcoa, Tennessee employees nearby aluminum processing plant. During Florida land boom 1920s Southern Florida, communities Coral Gables, Opa-locka, Miami Springs, suburbs Miami, incorporated fully planned "themed" communities reflect architecture look Spain, Arabia, Mexico respectively, considered first modern planned communities United States. Oldsmar, located west central Florida, developed automobile pioneer Ransom E. Olds. In 1928, San Clemente, California incorporated Ole Hanson designated buildings must approved architectural review board order retain control development building style. During Great Depression 1930s, several model towns planned built Federal government. Arthurdale Eleanor, West Virginia, federally funded New Deal communities, Eleanor Roosevelt's projects ease burden depression coal miners. The Tennessee Valley Authority created several towns accommodate workers constructing new dams; prominent Norris, Tennessee. Three "Greenbelt Communities", Greenbelt, Maryland, Greenhills, Ohio, Greendale, Wisconsin, built Federal government 1930s planned surrounding "belt" woodland natural landscaping. During World War II, Manhattan Project built several planned communities provide accommodations scientists, engineers, industrial workers families. These communities, including Oak Ridge, Tennessee, Richland, Washington Los Alamos, New Mexico necessary laboratories industrial plants Manhattan Project built isolated locations ensure secrecy. Even existence towns military secret, towns closed public war. Aerial view Levittown, Pennsylvania circa 1959 The Levittowns—in Long Island, Pennsylvania New Jersey (now known Willingboro, New Jersey) – typified planned suburban communities 1950s early 1960s. California's Rohnert Park (north San Francisco) another example planned city (built time Levittown) marketed attract middle-class people area populated farmers phrase, "A Country Club middle class." Many places, Orange County, California, Conejo Valley Ventura County, Valencia Los Angeles County, well Phoenix, Arizona Northern Arizona also many master planned communities following housing boom 1960s, fathers Scottsdale, Arizona foresaw huge amount growth Arizona. Some communities include Anaheim Hills, Rossmoor, Irvine, Ladera Ranch, Laguna Niguel, Mission Viejo, Talega, Thousand Oaks, Westlake Village, Newbury Park, Valencia California (in Phoenix area) Marley Park, Talking Rock Ranch, McCormick Ranch, Rio Verde, Tartesso Verrado Buckeye, Arizona. The neighborhood Warren city Bisbee distinction Arizona's first planned community. In Conejo Valley, East County Area Ventura County, cities master planned. Most notably, Thousand Oaks, Newbury Park, Westlake Village area master planned Janss Investment Company, also responsible development Westwood Village, part Westside Los Angeles. Valencia area master planned community incorporated City Santa Clarita, developed planned Newhall Land Farming Company. About 25% Orange County composed various master planned communities, much done Irvine Company, since 1990, 85% developments Orange County slightly smaller amount communities Arizona part master planned community. 75% resales today Phoenix area homes master planned communities, 80% new home construction permits issued Arizona building departments master planned communities. These communities provide functionality precious land left area, well ability create housing-business-transportation-open space balance. The era modern planned city began 1962–64 creation Reston, Virginia begun year Coral Springs western Broward County, Florida, Columbia, Maryland. In recent years, New Urbanism set stage new cities, places like idyllic Seaside, Florida, Disney's new town Celebration, Florida. In United States, suburban growth Sunbelt states coincided popularity Master Planned Communities within established suburbs. Texas forefront trend. Las Colinas, established 1973, one first examples still growing. Las Colinas 12,000 acres (4,900ha) master planned community within Dallas-area city Irving. In 2006, residents approved changes deed restrictions allow greater density urban mixed-use residential construction. Also 1970s, north existing town Spring, Texas (north Houston), oil gas industry executive George P. Mitchell developed The Woodlands, major residential commercial master planned community considered one premier residential business destinations Houston area. The Woodlands still experiencing huge growth day. In 1990s, Cinco Ranch first developed south existing town Katy, one western suburbs Houston, contributed explosive recent growth Houston's suburban west side. In San Francisco Bay Area, master planned commercial developments Bishop Ranch San Ramon Hacienda Business Park Pleasanton attracted major corporate tenants relocate downtown Oakland San Francisco; companies include Safeway, Chevron Corporation ATT (as former Pacific Bell). In recent years, new towns Mountain House, San Joaquin County, California, added new wrinkle movement: prevent conurbation nearby cities, imposed strict growth boundaries, well automatic "circuit breakers" place moratoriums residential development number jobs per resident town falls certain value. Centennial new town part Tejon Ranch halfway Los Angeles Bakersfield, incorporate restrictions order minimize commuter load severely congested I-5. Coyote Springs, Nevada, Destiny, Florida Douglas Ranch Buckeye, Arizona amongst largest communities planned 21st century. A recent twist town Ave Maria, Florida, founded 2007, anchored Catholic university large Catholic church center town surrounded commercial residential development. South America[edit] Argentina[edit] La Plata air. La Plata planned 1880 replace Buenos Aires city capital Buenos Aires Province. Urban planner Pedro Benoit designed city layout based rationalist conception urban centers. The city shape square central park two main diagonal avenues, north-south east-west. (In addition, numerous shorter diagonals.) This design copied self-similar manner small blocks six six blocks length. Every six blocks, one finds small park square. Other diagonals, streets rectangular grid, numbered consecutively. The designs government buildings chosen international architectural competition. Thus, Governor Palace designed Italians, City Hall Germans, etc. Electric street lighting installed 1884, first kind Latin America. Brazil[edit] Brasília: Brasília: Pilot Plan Juscelino Kubitschek, President Brazil 1956 1961, ordered construction Brasília, fulfilling promise Constitution political campaign promise. Building Brasília part Juscelino's "fifty years prosperity five" plan. Lúcio Costa contest main urban planner 1957, 5550 people competing. Oscar Niemeyer, close friend, chief architect public buildings Roberto Burle Marx landscape designer. Brasília built 41 months, 1956 April 21, 1960, officially inaugurated. The former capital Brazil Rio de Janeiro, resources tended concentrated southeast region Brazil. While city built need neutrally located federal capital, main reason promote development Brazil's hinterland better integrate entire territory Brazil. Brasília approximately geographical center Brazilian territory. Lúcio Costa, city's principal architect, designed city shaped like airplane. Housing offices situated giant superblocks, everything following original plan. The plan specifies zones residential, zones commercial, industries settle, official buildings built, maximum height buildings, etc.[citation needed] Belo Horizonte: Belo Horizonte 1895. In 1889, Brazil became republic, agreed new state capital Minas Gerais, tune modern prosperous Minas Gerais, set. In 1893, due climatic topographic conditions, Curral Del Rey selected Minas Gerais governor Afonso Pena among cities location new economical cultural center state, new name "Cidade de Minas," City Minas. Aarão Reis, urbanist State Pará, set design second planned city Brazil (the first one Teresina), Cidade de Minas inaugurated finally 1897, many unfinished constructions Brazilian Government set deadline completion. Inhabitation city subsidized local government, concession free empty lots funding building houses. An interesting feature Reis' downtown street plan Belo Horizonte inclusion symmetrical array perpendicular diagonal streets named Brazilian states Brazilian indigenous tribes. Goiânia: The plan city 50,000 shape concentric radius – streets form spoke, Praça Cívica center, seats state municipal government – The Palace Emeralds Palace Campinas. In 1937, decree signed transferring state capital Cidade de Goiás Goiânia. The official inauguration occurred 1942 presence president republic, governors, ministers.[citation needed] Fordlândia built part Henry Ford's motor company. Originally intended rubber plantation, failed within several years home squatting farmers.[42] Other notable planned cities Brazil include Teresina (The first one, inaugurated 1842), Petrópolis, Boa Vista, Palmas, Londrina, Maringá (the latter two state Paraná). Venezuela[edit] Guayana City – Bolívar State Puerto Ordaz – Bolívar State Oceania[edit] This section cite sources. Please help improve section adding citations reliable sources. Unsourced material may challenged removed. (October 2012) (Learn remove template message) Australia[edit] Australia's prominent fully planned city Canberra, designed American architect Walter Burley Griffin. The early central areas two major capital cities — Adelaide Melbourne — also planned surveyors. Walter Burley Griffin Australia's notable city planner also designed smaller cities towns including Leeton Griffith New South Wales. A controversial Japanese-backed planned city, Multifunction Polis, proposed 1980s never implemented. Australia still building planned communities developers Delfin Lend Lease, SP/ASX 50 company, responsible large master planned communities as; Forest Lake, Queensland, Brisbane (completed 2004) The New Rouse Hill, Sydney (current) Golden Grove, South Australia (Completed 1991) Adelaide[edit] Adelaide's planned town grids surrounded parkland intersected River Torrens Adelaide founded British German colonists 1836 test Edward Gibbon Wakefield's theories systematic colonisation. Convict labour employed colony theory would financially self-sufficient; practice, government assistance used early stages. Land sold anyone set foot largely unexplored territory city (the basis future central business district) surveyed planned remarkably short space time. Adelaide's design praised four-square layout, choice setting ample parklands minimal encroachment developments. The town centre sufficient proximity water source, River Torrens. Melbourne[edit] A reconstruction Robert Hoddle's original plans Melbourne's central grid defined early township today's city centre Melbourne planned free settlement 1837 Hoddle Grid, drawn Robert Hoddle instructions George Gipps, original plan Melbourne part first land sales (prior planning handful existing settlements built fringe grid). The grid featured wide parallel streets, spanning gently sloping valley hills (Batman's Hill, Flagstaff Hill Eastern Hill) roughly parallel course Yarra River. The deliberate exclusion city squares open space within grid subject future frustration municipality residents Elizabeth Street, Melbourne, centre grid, built gully therefore prone flooding. Despite later extension later inclusion planned suburbs, Melbourne's original plans extensive Adelaide's, city rapidly outgrew original boundaries. As such, often considered planned city, grid continues define much character Melbourne city centre. Canberra[edit] Inner Canberra demonstrates aspects Griffin plan, particular Parliamentary Triangle Canberra, established 1908, planned capital city Australia Australia's notable ambitious example civic planning. The city designed Federal Capital following federation six Australian colonies formed Commonwealth Australia. The new nation required capital located away major settlements Melbourne Sydney. Canberra thus located Territory – Australian Capital Territory – State. Prior time land Canberra found farming land, indigenous settlements, forest. In 1912, extensive planning competition completed, vision American Walter Burley Griffin chosen winning design city. Extensive construction public works required complete city, involved flooding large parcel land form center piece city, Lake Burley Griffin. Unlike Australian cities, road network, suburbs, parks elements city designed context other, rather haphazard planning witnessed much Sydney. Notable buildings include High Court, Federal Parliament, Government House, War Memorial, Anzac Parade headquarters Department Defence. New Zealand[edit] New Zealand several small New Towns, built specific purpose. Examples include Kawerau Bay Plenty (a mill town), Twizel North Otago, Mangakino Waikato (both hydroelectricity), Turangi near Taupo (for Tongariro Power Scheme). Construction Kawerau began 1953. Twizel built 1968 service nearby hydroelectric projects supposed close completion. However, residents managed save town 1983. Mangakino, constructed 1946, also meant temporary construction town, remains today. John Martin, founder Wairarapa town Martinborough, set town's first streets pattern Union Flag 19th century. In 2006, construction began Pegasus Town, new planned town adjacent Woodend, approximately 25km (16mi) north Christchurch. See also[edit] Lists purpose-built capital cities List planned cities Arcology Arcosanti Cardus decumanus Roman coloniae Company town Garden city movement Grid plan Housing estate Model village Multifunction Polis Olympic Movement Principles Intelligent Urbanism Private Community Urban planning List urban planners Utopia References[edit] ^ "World's Fastest Growing Cities Asia Africa". Euromonitor. 2 March 2010. Archived original October 2015. Retrieved 26 October 2015. ^ Graff, Philippe (1994). "La Valette: une ville nouvelle du XVIe siècle et son évolution jusqu'à nos jours". Revue du Monde Musulman et de la Méditerranée: Le carrefour maltais (in French). Publications de l'Université de Provence. 71 (1): 157. ISSN2105-2271. ^ Njeru, Purity (2009). "History Gaborone". Nairobi, Kenya: The African Executive. Retrieved 2009-08-04. ^ Australia Financial Review, 9 January 2013. ^ BBC News – Kenya begins construction 'silicon' city Konza. Bbc.co.uk (2013-01-23). Retrieved 2013-07-21. ^ Murray, Senan (13 February 2007). "Life poverty Abuja's wealth". BBC News. ^ Elumoye, Deji (2007-09-26). "'Eko Atlantic city Underway'". Thisday (via allAfrica.com). AllAfrica Global Media. Retrieved 2008-02-04. ^ "FG urges Nigerians Diaspora invest Centenary City". Vanguard Newspapers. 26 July 2013. Retrieved 2013-10-08. ^ "Nigeria: Development Plan Dismisses Threats Lekki/Victoria Island's Real Estate Prospects". allafrica.com. 6 July 2015. Retrieved 15 December 2015. ^ "Orange Island N40 billion project broaches new housing deal Lagos". The Guardian, Lagos. 4 May 2015. Retrieved 23 December 2015. ^ "တိုင်းခုနစ်တိုင်းကို တိုင်းဒေသကြီးများအဖြစ် လည်းကောင်း၊ ကိုယ်ပိုင်အုပ်ချုပ်ခွင့်ရ တိုင်းနှင့် ကိုယ်ပိုင်အုပ်ချုပ်ခွင့်ရ ဒေသများ ရုံးစိုက်ရာ မြို့များကို လည်းကောင်း ပြည်ထောင်စုနယ်မြေတွင် ခရိုင်နှင့်မြို့နယ်များကို လည်းကောင်း သတ်မှတ်ကြေညာ". Weekly Eleven News (in Burmese). 2010-08-20. Retrieved 2010-08-23. ^ Marshall Cavendish Corporation (2007). World Its Peoples: Eastern Southern Asia. Marshall Cavendish. p. 650. ^ "Construction Myanmar new capital continues". People's Daily Online. Xinhua News. 24 December 2009. ^ Gunawan Tjahjono, ed. (1998). Architecture. Indonesian Heritage. 6. Singapore: Archipelago Press. p.109. ISBN981-3018-30-5. ^ Dino Fanara (2006). Angel East Indies: Biography Van Dooremolen Family. iUniverse. p.55. ISBN9780595860449. ^ Silver, Christopher (2007). Planning Megacity: Jakarta Twentieth Century – Planning, History Environment Series. Routledge. p.101. ISBN9781135991227. ^ "Tiru Malaysia, SBY Dukung Pemindahan Ibukota". www.inilah.com. ^ "SBY: Mari Lanjutkan Ide Membangun Ibukota Baru". news.okezone.com. ^ "Archived copy". Archived original 2004-12-28. Retrieved 2012-10-06. ^ Appraisal City Development Plan – Navi Mumbai. National Institute Urban Affairs, 2008. ^ "Archived copy" (PDF). Archived original (PDF) 2009-03-27. Retrieved 2016-02-07. ^ "The World Factbook — Central Intelligence Agency". Cia.gov. Retrieved 2016-08-27. ^ "Capital Development Authority". Visitislamabad.net. Retrieved 2016-08-27. ^ "Google Maps". Maps.google.co.uk. Retrieved 2016-08-27. ^ Boerefijn, Wim (2010) ‘’The foundation, planning building new towns 13th 14th centuries Europe. An architectural-historical research urban form creation’’. Phd. thesis Universiteit van Amsterdam. ISBN 978-90-9025157-8 ([1]). ^ Почела градња "Андрићграда" (Serbian) ^ "Partizánske". Partizanske.sk. Retrieved 2016-08-27. ^ Proyectos IP. "La Carolina (Jaén)". Pueblos-espana.org. 38.274399;-3.614214. Retrieved 2016-08-27. ^ Marschall, Melissa. "Mega Projects Limits Urban Planning Megacities: The Case Istanbul AKP Era | Middle East Institute". Mei.edu. Retrieved 2016-08-27. ^ "Bir Başkentin Oluşumu: Avusturyalı, Alman İsviçreli Mimarların İzleri – Yeni Başkente Doğru – Şehir Planlaması – Goethe-Institut". Goethe.de. Retrieved 2016-08-27. ^ "İmar Plânı". Aydinatca.com. Retrieved 2016-08-27. ^ "Odesa | Travel Ukraine – 10 Must See Places – Odessa". Travel Ukraine. Retrieved 2016-08-27. ^ "New Towns". Best Laid Schemes. 2010-08-30. Retrieved 2016-08-27. ^ "Body". Cyclecraft.co.uk. Retrieved 2016-08-27. ^ [2][dead link] ^ "デパートおせち予約・通販ランキング". Harlowarttrust.org. Retrieved 2016-08-27. ^ "Archived copy". Archived original 2010-05-03. Retrieved 2010-06-09. ^ "Malcolm Robertson Site Specific Public Art WorksMalcolm Robertson". Malcolmrobertson.com. Retrieved 2016-08-27. ^ [3] ^ Wilson, Thomas D. The Ashley Cooper Plan: The Founding Carolina Origins Southern Political Culture. Chapel Hill, NC: University North Carolina Press, 2016. pp. 12–13. ^ [4] Archived March 12, 2012, Wayback Machine. ^ "Fordlandia: The Failure Ford's Jungle Utopia". 6 June 2009. NPR. Retrieved 2 May 2012. External links[edit] Wikimedia Commons media related Planned cities. International New Town Institute (INTI) European New Town Platform Town Country Planning Association (formerly Garden Cities Association) The Alicia Patterson Foundation: Disappointing New Towns Great Britain Movie: New Towns Scotland UK Model Villages, Garden Cities New Towns (this links Keyhole Markup Language file opens Google Earth see aerial photos places.) v e Real estate developments Commercial Airport Business park Commercial area Mixed-use development Office building Port inland Retail park Riverfront Shopping mall / center Shopping streets districts Warehouse District Industrial Business cluster Industrial district Industrial park Technology centers Residential Apartment complex Bungalow court City block Company town Golf course community Gated community Housing estate Intentional community Mixed-use development Model dwellings poor Multi-family residential Private community Public housing Residential area Retirement community Revenue house Single room occupancy Subdivision Tract housing Science / Education Campus Research park list Satellite campus Science park Municipal Arcology Garden city movement Model village Planned cities Planned community Urban open space parks Buildings Apartment House types Skyscraper Tower block Villa Miscellaneous Brownfield land Cemetery Cluster development Construction Context theory Eminent domain Greenfield land Greyfield land Land-use planning Park Parking Playground Redevelopment Regional planning Urban design Urban planning Zoning Authority control GND: 4238072-8 Retrieved "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Planned_communityoldid=774809956" Categories: Planned citiesPlanned communitiesNew townsReal estateHidden categories: CS1 French-language sources (fr)CS1 Burmese-language sources (my)Articles Serbian-language external linksAll articles dead external linksArticles dead external links July 2013Webarchive template wayback linksPages using ISBN magic linksAll articles unsourced statementsArticles unsourced statements October 2014Articles containing Japanese-language textArticles lacking in-text citations October 2012All articles lacking in-text citationsArticles unsourced statements October 2012Articles unsourced statements August 2009Articles unsourced statements September 2011Articles unsourced statements March 2009Articles unsourced statements October 2011Articles needing additional references October 2012All articles needing additional referencesWikipedia articles GND identifiers Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read Edit View history More Search Navigation Main pageContentsFeatured contentCurrent eventsRandom articleDonate WikipediaWikipedia store Interaction HelpAbout WikipediaCommunity portalRecent changesContact page Tools What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationWikidata itemCite page Print/export Create bookDownload PDFPrintable version In projects Wikimedia Commons Languages العربيةDanskDeutschEspañolFrançaisGalego한국어Bahasa IndonesiaItalianoעבריתქართულიLadinoBahasa MelayuNederlands日本語Norsk bokmålPortuguêsРусскийSimple EnglishСрпски / srpskiSvenska粵語中文 Edit links This page last modified 10 April 2017, 20:13. Text available Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using site, agree Terms Use Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® registered trademark Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view (window.RLQ=window.RLQ||[]).push(function(){mw.config.set({"wgPageParseReport":{"limitreport":{"cputime":"0.632","walltime":"0.765","ppvisitednodes":{"value":5188,"limit":1000000},"ppgeneratednodes":{"value":0,"limit":1500000},"postexpandincludesize":{"value":117615,"limit":2097152},"templateargumentsize":{"value":8055,"limit":2097152},"expansiondepth":{"value":12,"limit":40},"expensivefunctioncount":{"value":11,"limit":500},"entityaccesscount":{"value":1,"limit":400},"timingprofile":["100.00% 528.373 1 -total"," 39.88% 210.720 1 Template:Reflist"," 27.73% 146.534 14 Template:Citation_needed"," 25.46% 134.542 15 Template:Fix"," 20.73% 109.537 22 Template:Cite_web"," 14.57% 77.005 14 Template:Delink"," 10.00% 52.830 32 Template:Category_handler"," 5.24% 27.678 6 Template:Cite_news"," 4.83% 25.525 2 Template:Convert"," 4.20% 22.193 1 Template:Commons_category"]},"scribunto":{"limitreport-timeusage":{"value":"0.290","limit":"10.000"},"limitreport-memusage":{"value":8603894,"limit":52428800}},"cachereport":{"origin":"mw1261","timestamp":"20170410201346","ttl":2592000,"transientcontent":false}}});});(window.RLQ=window.RLQ||[]).push(function(){mw.config.set({"wgBackendResponseTime":71,"wgHostname":"mw1275"});});